A Beginner's Guide to the 
Cards, Spreads, and Revealmg 
the Mystery of the Tarot 










LIZ DEAN 

author of The Art of Tarot and The Golden Tarot 


THE 


ULTIMATE 


GUIDE TO 
















A Beginner’s Guide to the Cards, 
Spreads, and Revealing the Mystery of 

the Tarot 


LIZ DEAN 

author of The Art of Tarot and The Golden Tarot 


A\ 


Fair Winds Press 

100 Cummings Center, Suite 406L 
Beverly, MA 01915 

fairwindspress.com • bodymindbeautyhealth.com 



Contents 


CHAPTER 1 


INTRODUCING THE TAROT 


CHAPTER 2 


HOW TO BEGIN 


CHAPTER 3 


CARD LAYOUTS 


CHAPTER 4 


CARD INTERPRETATIONS: The Major Arcana 

0, The Fool 

I, The Magician 

II, The High Priestess 

III, The Empress 

IV, The Emperor 

V, The Hierophant 

VI, The Lovers 

VII, The Chariot 

VIII, Strength 

IX, The Hermit 

X, The Wheel of Fortune 

XI, Justice 

XII, The Hanged Man 

XIII, Death 

XIV, Temperance 

XV, The Devil 

XVI, The Tower 

XVII, The Star 
XVIII, The Moon 










XIX, The Sun 

XX, Judgment 

XXI, The World 


CHAPTER 5 


CARD INTERPRETATIONS: The Minor Arcana 

The Suit of Cups 
Ace of Cups 
Two of Cups 
Three of Cups 
Four of Cups 
Five of Cups 
Six of Cups 
Seven of Cups 
Eight of Cups 
Nine of Cups 
Ten of Cups 
Page of Cups 
Knight of Cups 
Queen of Cups 
King of Cups 
The Suit of Pentacles 
Ace of Pentacles 
Two of Pentacles 
Three of Pentacles 
Four of Pentacles 
Five of Pentacles 
Six of Pentacles 
Seven of Pentacles 
Eight of Pentacles 
Nine of Pentacles 
Ten of Pentacles 




Page of Pentacles 
Knight of Pentacles 
Queen of Pentacles 
King of Pentacles 
The Suit of Swords 
Ace of Swords 
Two of Swords 
Three of Swords 
Four of Swords 
Five of Swords 
Six of Swords 
Seven of Swords 
Eight of Swords 
Nine of Swords 
Ten of Swords 
Page of Swords 
Knight of Swords 
Queen of Swords 
King of Swords 
The Suit of Wands 
Ace of Wands 
Two of Wands 
Three of Wands 
Four of Wands 
Five of Wands 
Six of Wands 
Seven of Wands 
Eight of Wands 
Nine of Wands 
Ten of Wands 
Page of Wands 


Knight of Wands 
Queen of Wands 
King of Wands 

Afterword 
Appendices 
Acknowledgments 
About the Author 
Index 


INTRODUCING THE TAROT 


HOW TO WORK WITH THIS BOOK 

This book offers everything you need to know to read tarot cards for daily 
affirmation, prediction, and intuitive and spiritual development. Anyone can 
learn to work with tarot and can benefit greatly from its insights; all you need is 
an open mind and a willingness to trust the impressions you sense during a 
reading. 

We begin with the basics—the structure of a tarot deck, and how the cards 
link with astrology, Kabbala, and numbers (see pages 10 and 19). Next, you’ll 
learn how to lay out the cards for a reading. You can try the traditional spreads 
on pages 20-28, and the mini-layouts given for each major arcana card—a total 
of thirty. The mini-layouts are all original to this book, and I invite you to share 
them and use them as inspiration for devising your own spreads; the aim is to 
help you be creative with tarot, to experiment and find ways to read the cards 
that work for you. There’s no right or wrong way to lay out cards just the way 
that’s right for you. 

The interpretations chapters follow from page 29 on. To begin with, you 
might like to use the key words for the card meanings shown on pages 29 and 
118 as a quick reference. In the detailed major arcana card interpretations, you 
will see listed the card’s alternative names, number, and numerological 
association—this is the number that the card’s number reduces to, which gives 
additional insight. For example, XXI, The World, reduces as follows: 2 + 1 = 3, 
or III, The Empress. Also listed is the card’s astrological sign or planet, element, 
Hebrew letter and Tree of Life pathway, chakra, and key meanings. I also 
highlight and explain the key symbols of each card, along with each major 
arcana card’s “Reflection” in the minor arcana, which guides you toward the 
minor cards that hold similar meanings to the major card. For example, major 
card IV, The Emperor, is reflected in the four kings of the minor arcana because 
as kings they reflect the “father” aspect of the Emperor. 




The minor arcana interpretations are divided by suit and list for cards Ace 
through Ten each card’s suit, element, astrological association, number, and Tree 
of Life position and key meaning. Page and Knight court cards list just their 
element and key meaning, while the Queens and Kings also include zodiac signs 
and associated chakras. You’ll find further information on chakras’ and crystals’ 
association with tarot in the Appendicies, along with a glossary of terms. 

When you are reading your cards, or reading about them, you may be drawn 
to particular aspects, from astrology to Kabbala or numerology to an individual 
card’s fascinating history or symbols. While all these areas are research subjects 
in themselves, this book aims to give you a foundation from which to begin; if 
you’re a seasoned reader, my hope is that you will find something in these pages 
that sparks your imagination and offers a new perspective. 

However you work with this book, I invite you to share with me the journey 
of tarot and benefit from greater insight into yourself and others. 


HOW READING TAROT CAN BENEFIT YOU 


Tarot is a system of archetypes, a picture-book of the human condition, 
reflecting our states of mind and stages of life. Over the past six hundred years, 
people have consulted the cards for religious instruction, spiritual insight, self- 
knowledge, and divining the future. The ancient symbols we see on the cards are 
designed to stimulate our intuition, connecting us with our higher selves or our 
divine or spiritual aspect. 

Regular tarot practice has many personal benefits, including the following: 


Increased self-awareness: Tarot gives you space to focus on yourself. 

3? Enhanced creativity: A tarot reading can offer a different perspective on a 
problem and innovative ways forward. 


3v Better-honed intuition and psychic ability: Tarot helps you see probable 
future events and influences. 


3v The ability to empower others to find their spiritual path 


A NOTE ON THE RIDER-WAITE TAROT 

Myriad versions and styles of tarot decks have been created through the years. 


The tarot deck shown throughout this book is the Universal Waite, an enhanced 
Rider-Waite deck. The original Rider-Waite was devised by A. E. Waite, one of 
the key members of the Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn (see page 10), and 
published by Rider, London. It is considered the most influential contemporary 
deck and has inspired many variants. The deck should properly be known as the 
Rider-Waite Smith, to honor the illustrator, Pamela Colman Smith, a fellow 
member of the Golden Dawn. 


EARLY CARDS: COURT AND CLERGY 

The earliest surviving tarot cards date to the fifteenth century, probably created 
in Northern Italy. (It’s likely that the word tarot derives from tarocchi, an Italian 
card game that preceded tarot.) These cards, known as the Visconti-Sforza tarots, 
were commissioned by the Duke of Milan, Franceso Visconti, as early as 1415. 
Although the Church called early cards “the devil’s picture book”—possibly 
because some printed versions were used for gaming purposes—these original, 
hand-painted cards have predominantly Christian themes and imagery. Their 
sequence tells a story of a youth who symbolically dies and is reborn, embodied 
in 0, The Fool, and XXI, The World (see pages 30 and 114; for this reason, the 
sequence of cards known as the major arcana is often referred to as “The Fool’s 
Journey”). The cards feature angels, the four virtues, the Devil, and a male and 
female Pope, along with other characters we would associate more with 
fairytales than a satanic manifesto: the wise woman, the mother, father, the 
innocent youth, old man, lovers, kings, queens, knights, and a magician. Yet 
knowledge of the tarot may have preceded even the Duke, as in 1377 a German 
monk, brother Johannes von Rheinfield, described a series of painted cards that 
worked as an allegorical journey of life and the soul. It’s also believed that 
gnostic sects may have used the cards to teach illiterate people about dualism, or 
the interplay of opposites—which we see in many of the card’s meanings. In this 
way, the cards may have been used to express and possibly teach Christian 
beliefs. 


HIDDEN KNOWLEDGE: ASTROLOGY AND KABBALA 

The word occult may have dark connotations, but it actually means hidden 
knowledge. The tarot’s reputation as an occult practice crept in during the 
eighteenth century, with the French Freemason Antoine Court de Gebelin’s 


treatise Monde Primitif (1781) in which he claimed tarot cards were in effect an 
ancient Egyptian book of wisdom; he named the tarot The Book of Thoth, after 
the Egyptian god of healing, wisdom, and the occult. De Gebelin’s beliefs 
emerged as a part of the occult revival of the late 1800s, when ancient 
knowledge was popularized by Napoleon’s invasion of Egypt in 1798 and tomb 
artifacts made their way to the West. De Gebelin’s work was continued by a 
Parisian barber, Jean-Baptiste Alliette (know by his pseudonym Etteilla), who 
developed the tarot’s possible links with Kabbala, the esoteric belief system 
based in Hebrew tradition. The story continues with the French Rosicrucian 
Eliphas Levi, who made the connection between the twenty-two cards of the 
major arcana and the twenty-two letters of the Hebrew alphabet, which 
correspond to pathways on the Tree of Life. 

Levi’s research influenced A. E. Waite, the creator of the Rider-Waite cards, 
who was a leading light of the Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn, a British 
occult society founded in 1888 by freemasons William Wynn Westcott, William 
Robert Woodman, and Samuel Liddell Mathers. The order brought together 
kabbalistic, astrological, and Egyptian wisdom, creating a theory of tarot 
associations that have become generally accepted today (see the Appendicies for 
a list of these associations for the major and minor arcanas). 

While tarot has collected many occult associations over the years, essentially, 
these magical cards reflect the beliefs of their creators. Tarot’s ability to adapt 
and survive has lead to a plethora of decks, from Wiccan tarots to Steampunk, 
angel tarots to vampires, and fairies to Da Vinci. While these may be 
contemporary tastes, tarot ultimately speaks to us through its archetypes, the 
infinite mirrors of the self. 


EXPLORING THE DECK: THE MAJOR AND MINOR 
ARCANA 

A standard tarot deck has seventy-eight cards, divided into two groups: twenty- 
two major arcana cards and fifty-six minor arcana cards. The word arcana 
means secret. The major arcana denote important life events or shifts, while the 
minor arcana cards reflect day-to-day events. The minor arcana cards can be 
seen as being more detailed aspects of the major arcana cards. 


The Major Arcana Cards 



Numbered from 0 (The Fool) to XXI (The World), the twenty-two major arcana 
cards can be referred to singularly as arcanum and collectively as keys or 
trumps. Although no one knows the provenance of the tarot’s major arcana cards 
for sure, some suspect the word trump derives from triumphs, from the old card 
game Trionfi, popular initially in Italy and France. In the game, trump cards 
approximating the major arcana outranked other cards in the deck. For example, 
the Fool is trumped by the clever Magician, who is trumped by the wisdom of 
the High Priestess. Well-known librarian Gertrude Moakley also suggested that 
the major arcana characters and symbols derived from a Milanese carnival based 
on the Roman festival of Saturnalia: Cityfolk dressed as tarot trumps and 
processed in chariots throughout the city. As the Duke of Milan is believed to 
have commissioned some of the first tarot cards in the fifteenth century (the 
Visconti-Sforza tarots, some of which survive today), the festival explanation 
may be plausible. 




The Minor Arcana Cards 

The remaining fifty-six cards are known collectively as the minor arcana, and 
they are arranged into four suits: Wands, Pentacles, Cups, and Swords. Each suit 
has fourteen cards, from Ace to Ten, plus four court cards: Page, Knight, Queen, 
and King. 

The four suits each have a ruling element, and each corresponds to specific 
areas of life: 


Cups: the element of Water; emotions and relationships 


































i> Pentacles: the element of Earth; property, money, and achievement 
Swords: the element of Air; the intellect and decisions 

Wands: the element of Fire; instinct, travel, and communication 

Psychologist Carl Jung famously distilled humankind’s mental processes into 
his theory of four functions, and it sums up the suit meanings neatly: 


Swords/Air: I think 
Wands/Fire: I desire 
Pentacles/Earth: I possess 
Cups/Water: I feel 

Another way of remembering the suits’ elements is as follows: 


iv Swords/Air: I think—the mind 
Wands/Fire: I desire—the soul 
Pentacles/Earth: I possess—the body 

Cups/Water: I feel—the heart 
The court, or people, cards of the minor arcana bring an additional element: 

W* Knights: Fire 
Queens: Water 
Kings: Air 
Pages: Earth 

So, for example, the Knight of Wands is Fire of the suit of Fire, while the 
Queen of Wands is Water of the suit of Fire. 

Understanding the basic concepts of the elements offers a meaning for the 
card. So, the Queen of Wands, combining Water and Fire, suggests emotions and 
intuition (Water) with communication and energy (Fire). 







































































































































































HOW TO BEGIN 


YOUR CARDS, YOUR ENERGIES: CARD ATTUNEMENT, 
CLEANSING, AND PROTECTION 

Tarot cards, like people, draw in energy. During readings, tarot cards absorb your 
energies and those of anyone else who touches them. For this reason, it’s 
important not to let other people touch your cards casually; the cards hold your 
energies and intentions, and are personal to you. Here are tried-and-tested ways 
to attune to your new deck, cleanse the cards before a reading session, and 
protect them when you are not using them. 

Attuning to a New Deck 

The process of connecting with your cards is called attuning. The more 
connected you feel to your cards, the more accurate, insightful, and inspiring 
your readings can be. 

Before you begin reading a new deck of tarot cards, attune to them for exactly 
seven days by sleeping with your cards under your pillow. Also, get to know 
them by looking at the cards daily, touching them so your energy becomes 
imprinted upon them. Some readers attune to their cards through visualization. 
Try this: 

1. Hold your cards in your right hand. This is known as the giving hand—and 
you are about to give the cards your energy. 

2 . Close your eyes, take a deep breath, and visualize light pouring down through 
the crown of your head, your third-eye chakra, throat, and heart (see page 
236), then down your right arm, into your right hand, and into the cards. 

3. Imagine your cards filling with pure light. If you work with spirit guides or 
angels, ask them to come close and to help and protect you during the reading. 

4 . Open your eyes when you are ready. 




Cleansing Your Deck Before a Reading Session 

When you take out your cards, clear away any old energy by blowing on and 
knocking on your cards as follows: 

1. Hold the cards in one hand and fan them out. 

2. Gently blow on the card edges. You can do this in one breath. 

3. Next, put the cards back in a neat pile, still holding them in one hand, and then 
knock firmly once on the top of the deck. Now the deck is cleansed of old 
energy and ready to use. 

Protecting Your Cards When You’re Not Using Them 

Your cards hold your energy imprint. Like people, cards may pick up extraneous 
or negative energy from people and spaces, which can affect your readings. So 
when you are not using your cards, protect them from the environment, both 
physically and energetically. Keep them wrapped in a cloth of a dark color, such 
as deep purple cotton or silk, and in a tarot bag or a box. You can also store them 
with a favorite crystal—such as a clear quartz (known as the master crystal, 
which keeps energies clear) or amethyst (for healing, insight, and protection)— 
to keep them energetically cleansed and safe. 

Creating a Space for Your Readings 

First, find a peaceful space you feel relaxed and comfortable in. Make sure your 
space has a flat, clean surface you can lay your cards on. Most readers put down 
a reading cloth first to protect the cards both physically, as well as energetically, 
from direct contact with the surface you’re working on. The reading cloth is 
usually the silk cloth you wrap your cards in when they’re not in use, but any 
piece of fabric you like will do. 

You might like to perform a short ritual before you lay out the cards to honor 
the ancient practice of tarot-reading that you are about to embark upon. Our 
thoughts create reality and help manifest a strong connection between our cards, 
ourselves, the person you are reading for, and if you are aware of them, your 
spiritual guides who may help you during your reading. 

Here’s a suggestion to get you started, and you can personalize your own 
ritual as you read more: 


1. Light a candle in your reading space and place it on a safe surface. 



2. Close your eyes and take a few calming breaths. 

3. Visualize white light flowing from the crown of your head into your cards, as 
described in the attuning exercise, or simply set the intention to enjoy the best 
tarot reading you can. 

4 . When you have finished your reading, affirm in your mind that the reading is 
over, feel gratitude for the insights your cards and intuition have given you, 
and put your cards away. 

5. Blow out the candle. 


CHOOSING CARDS FOR A READING 
1. Shuffling the Deck 

After you’ve cleansed the deck, shuffle the cards for a few moments. Relax and 
allow your feelings and questions to surface. To choose the cards for a reading, 
you can use either the fan method or cut the deck. The fan method is best when 
you want just a few cards for a reading, while cutting the deck suits more 
elaborate layouts that need lots of cards, such as the Celtic Cross or Tree of Life. 

FAN METHOD 

When reading for yourself: Spread all the cards facedown in a fan shape. 
Choose the cards one by one with just your left hand (known as the hand of 
fate), from anywhere in the fan, and place them in front of you, still facedown, 
following the spread layout you have chosen. 

When reading for another person: Have the person shuffle the deck. Take 
the deck from the recipient and fan out the cards for him or her. Ask the recipient 
to choose the cards from the fan with his or her left hand and pass them to you so 
you can lay them out, keeping the cards facedown. 

CUTTING THE DECK 

When reading for yourself: Cut the deck twice with your left hand so you have 
three piles facedown on the table. Choose one pile to become the top of the deck 
and gather up the other two piles underneath it. Lay out the cards according to 
the spread you have chosen (see pages 20-28) by dealing the cards from the top 
of the deck and placing them facedown in front of you. 


When reading for another person: Ask the recipient to shuffle the cards. 
Have the recipient split the deck into three piles using his or her left hand and 
then choose one pile. Gather up the remaining two piles for the person and place 
their chosen pile on top. Then you lay out the cards. 

CUTTING THE DECK 



CHOSEN PILE-TOP 


TOP OF DECK 



2. Turning Over the Cards 

When turning over the cards, always flip them sideways—from left to right—not 
from top to bottom or vice versa, or you may be turning the card upside down. 
Doing so can give it a different meaning (see What About Reversals on page 19). 











USING THE CARD INTERPRETATIONS 


As you will see throughout this book, the cards—particularly the major arcana 
cards—have lots of symbols and possible meanings. Consider the cards before 
you look up their meaning; think about what aspect of a card you are drawn to 
first. This is your internal guidance directing you to the most relevant meaning 
of the card for your reading. This also means that the cards can offer a varying 
significance each time you look at them. Similarly, when you read for other 
people, you will find that you don’t give a card the same interpretation for every 
person who gets that card in a reading—you are personalizing the reading 
according to your intuition. 

Sometimes you’ll begin a reading and can’t make sense of what the cards are 
telling you. If this happens, here’s what to do: 


Shuffle and lay out the cards again. If the same or similar cards come up this 
time, go with the reading. Relax and tune in to the card images; don’t worry 
about reading the traditional interpretations. Say what comes into your head 
straight away, and the words will flow. 

Did the Ten of Wands come up? If so, this often means there’s too much 













going on just now and it’s not the right time to read your cards. Wait a day or 
two and try again. 

1 If you’re reading for someone else, feeling blocked can indicate the 
recipient’s state of mind. Here’s an example: During a recent beginners’ 
workshop, one of my students said, “My mind is blank. I’ve laid out the cards 
for Rosa, but I just don’t know what’s going on here—can you help me?” 
Before I could respond, Rosa said, “But that’s just how I feel—totally 
confused. I can’t think.” If this happens to you, acknowledge the recipient’s 
feelings and begin the reading again, asking him or her to let go of 
expectations. 


SIX EASY WAYS TO BEGIN YOUR TAROT READING 

These six techniques helped me learn tarot over the years—and I wish I’d known 
them all when I first began. Tarot is a journey, and you learn as you go. Try 
starting with just one or two of the following tips and see which ones fire your 
intuition. 

1. Get Intuitive: Work with Images First 

You will be guided to notice certain symbols on the cards. Each card is full of 
symbols—but you will find that you notice one or two features that really stand 
out in each picture. These are what I call your intuition hooks. Once you hone in 
on these, go deeper and connect with how they make you feel. Don’t worry 
about the written card meanings in this book just yet. Say whatever comes to 
your mind straight away—before you begin to think what the symbols mean— 
and imagine yourself telling a story. 

To develop the reading, trying looking at the quick-reference meanings only 
(see pages 29 and 118) and then go back to the card images. Staying with the 
image as long as you can stimulates your intuition, which is essential to a 
reading, whereas reading the words engages your logical left brain, which often 
becomes the judge, questioning if you’ve got it “right.” 

There’s no right or wrong—just your interpretation. You can read the detailed 
card meanings when you’re not giving a reading to develop knowledge. But to 
begin with, look at the pictures first; this technique can help you read any deck 
of cards, not just Rider-Waite tarot. 


2. Use Just the Major Arcana First 

Start with the major arcana cards and progress to the full seventy-eight-card deck 
when you’re more confident. The major arcana are the prime energies, whereas 
the minors are more incidental influences. As many minor cards are dilutions of 
the majors, you won’t be missing out on any vital information by beginning with 
majors-only readings. The majors will give you or the person you are reading for 
the essential messages. 

3. Ignore Reversed Card Meanings 

As you’re learning, work with the upright card meanings; if you get reversed 
cards, turn them the right way up and focus on your responses to the card in this 
position. Some tarot readers use reversals religiously, while others do not—no 
matter how great their experience and knowledge. It’s a matter of preference; go 
with what feels right for you. 

4. Read the Suit Cards by Their Element 

Try this minor arcana shortcut: Learn just the meaning of the element of each of 
the four suits. For example, Pentacles, the Earth element, tells you that security 
(home and finances, structure and planning) is the focus; Wands, for Fire, reveals 
talking, creating, and action. Cup cards, of the element Water, ask us to tend to 
our emotions and relationships; Swords, of the element Air, ask for mental 
clarity and the need for resolution and decisions. 


5. Read the Suit Cards by Their Numbers 

In numerology, the ancient art of mystical number interpretation, numbers have 
the following meanings, which correspond to the suit cards: 


Ones (Aces): Beginnings; new energy 
i> Twos: Partnerships, balance, and division 
Threes: Acknowledgment 
Fours: Stability and boundaries 
& Fives: Instability and challenges 
Sixes: Harmony and improvement 


Sevens: Potential and ambitions 
Eights: Rewards and progress 
i» Nines: Intensity 

Tens: Culmination; endings, but also beginnings; and completion 


The numbers are modified by the element of the suit—so the Three of 
Swords, in the sharp suit of Swords, means sorrow or betrayal (three Swords 
compete against one another), while the Three of Cups, in the loving suit of 
Cups, means celebration (three people make a happy crowd). Try putting 
together the suit element and the number and devise your own interpretations. 


6. Read Any Card by Its Colors 

You may be drawn to one or more colors on a card when you are interpreting it. 
Here’s a general guide to color meanings: 


THE TAROT RAINBOW 

Red: Energy, passion, and the material world 
Yellow: Consciousness, illumination, and self-expression 
Blue: Truth and clarity 
i* Green: Nature and growth 

Gray: Neutral; unknown outcomes 
Purple: Intuition and spirituality 
Black: Protection; oppression 
White: Purity and innocence 
Orange: Creativity and impulse 


WHAT ABOUT REVERSALS? 


You will see that all the card 
interpretations in this book contain 
both upright and reversed card 
meanings. An upright card is just 
that—when you turn it over, it is 
upright. A card is known as 
reversed when it is upside down. 

There are lots of books dealing 
solely with reversed meanings. 
With a few exceptions, a reversed 
card’s meaning is generally more 
negative than the positive, or 
upright, meaning. However, many 
tarot professionals ignore reversals 
in a reading and just turn the cards 
the right way up if they come out 
reversed; they use their intuition to 
interpret the card in a positive or 
negative light. Do whatever feels 
right for you. 


jx: 
































CARD LAYOUTS 


T here are many card layouts to try, but you will find, over time, that you use 
two or three spreads, regularly: Readers often learn the three-card Past, 
Present, Future; the Celtic Cross; and the Week Ahead as their foundation. 
Try them all and see which you prefer—and do look at the mini-spreads at the 
end of each major arcana card’s interpretation here for inspiration, too. 


THE ONE-CARD DAILY READING 

Giving yourself a daily one-card reading is a great way to get to know your tarot. 
Shuffle the deck, cut it or fan out the cards (see page 16), and choose one card 
with your left hand. You might also like to ask a question, such as “What do I 
need to know today?” 

Work with the card’s image for an interpretation or turn to the card 
interpretations starting on page 29. Display the card where you can see it during 
the day, or carry it with you. You can also choose the crystal associated with that 
card (see the list in the Appendicies, page 235). 


PAST, PRESENT, FUTURE 

This easy spread is perfect for mini-readings. Shuffle the deck, fan the cards or 
cut the deck, and then lay three cards as shown: 





1 PAST 2 PRESENT 3 FUTURE 

For more insight, you can lay an extra card for each position: 





1 PAST 


2 PRESENT 


3 FUTURE 




4 5 6 

You can also create your own three-card reading to look at different life 
aspects—for example, Mind, Body, Spirit; or Love, Money, Home. You can also 
lay a card known as a Significator (this comes up in the Week Ahead and Year 
Ahead spreads, too—see pages 25 and 27). A Significator is a card that first 
sums up the theme of a reading that you then lay down. For example: 








1 SIGNIFICATOR 




2 LOVE 3 MONEY 4 HOME 

If you’d like to lay cards on one theme, such as love, you can choose a 
Significator from the deck, rather than laying it out randomly as the first card 
that comes up after shuffling. For example, for a love reading, you might take 
out the Lovers card and then shuffle the deck and lay down three cards around it 
as follows: 






THE LOVERS 




1. PAST 2. PRESENT 3. OUTCOME 

INFLUENCES SITUATION 

For a legal question, choose Justice as your Significator; for questions about 
education, choose the Hierophant; for psychic development, the High Priestess; 
for family and fertility, choose the Empress; and so on. 










ASK THREE TIMES: YES OR NO? 

When you have a question and you need a fast answer, try this three-card oracle: 

1. Shuffle the cards and then spread them facedown in a fan shape. 

2. Ask your question aloud or in your mind. With your left hand, choose one 
card and place it to the left. 

3. Ask the question again and choose a second card. Place it in the center, as 
shown. 

4. Now ask your question a final time and choose a third card, placing it to the 
right. 

Turn over the cards and look at the list below to determine if they are yes, no, 
or neutral cards. If you get three yeses, your answer is certain; two yes cards 
(with one no or neutral) mean a positive outcome is most likely, but it may take 
time to come about; and all no or a mix of no/neutral cards means the answer to 
your question is, of course, negative. 

If you are reading reversals: Reversed cards mean no. If you’re not using 
reversals, turn any reversed cards the right way up and read the list below to find 
out if your question is a yes or no answer. 



Yes cards 



All cards apart from those listed here as no, neutral, or exceptions 


No cards 

Swords: Three, Five, Six, Seven, Eight, Nine, Ten, and Knight 
Cups: Five, Seven, and Eight 

Pentacles: Five 
Death 
The Devil 
The Tower 
The Moon 


Neutral cards 

Swords: Four 
Cups: Four 
The Hermit 
The Hanged Man 

Exceptions 


i> Two of Swords or Ten of Wands: The answer is not yet known. 

Five and Seven of Wands: The answer is yes, but you must fight for your 
prize. 


THE CELTIC CROSS 

The Celtic Cross is one of most popular tarot spreads in use today because it 
answers a question or, if you don’t have an immediate question, gives an 
overview of your life just now. Set your intention before you begin, asking your 
question or for an overview as your shuffle. 

Shuffle and choose the cards and then lay them out as shown below. 


Many readers lay out the Celtic Cross, then add cards around card 10 for 
more insight into the future. You can also choose any card from the layout and 
begin a Past, Present, and Future layout, using the card from the Celtic Cross in 
the card 2/Present position of that layout (see page 20) and adding two new cards 
surrounding it, with the next new card in the past position and the final new card 
in the future position. 

Tip: If the tenth card is a court card—a Page, Knight, Queen, or King—then 
the outcome of the question is up to you or the person you are reading for. 



10. THE OUTCOME 


9. HOPES OR FEARS 


8. YOUR ENVIRONMENT- 
EXTERNAL INFLUENCES 
AFFECTING YOU 


7. YOU 













FINDING THE QUINTESSENCE 

When you’ve finished a reading using any layout, here’s a way to glean 
further insight: Add up the major arcana cards by number and then reduce 
it to a single digit. For example, if you had three cards—II, The High 
Priestess; XXI, The World; and XIV, Temperance—this gives 2 + 21 + 14 
= 37. Reduce this number further by adding its two digits together: 3 + 7 = 
10, or X, The Wheel of Fortune. The meaning of this card—a change for 
the better (see page 70) —offers an additional dimension. 


THE WEEK AHEAD 

For a look at the Week Ahead, lay down one card for each day—though not in 
the regular, chronological sequence. 


















5. TUESDAY 2. WEDNESDAY 



4, SUNDAY 3. FRIDAY 


THE MONTH AHEAD 


Here’s how to see the influences over the next four weeks by laying two cards 










per week, side by side, as follows. 



4 


8 










THE YEAR AHEAD 


For the Year Ahead, lay down one card for each month in sequence, beginning 
with the current month, in the position of numbers on a clock face. Again, you’ll 
need a Significator card, so lay this first facedown in the center of the clockface, 
followed by your month cards—so if it were August, you would begin with an 
August card, then September, October and so on. 


THE TREE OF LIFE 

This layout reflects the pattern of the ten sephirots, or spheres, of the Tree of 
Life, the central motif of Kabbala (see page 234). The sephirots express the story 
of creation: The divine will flowed from the source, creating the top three 
sephirots, which overflowed and created more sephirots beneath. The sephirots 
are containers of the divine will of creation and the pathways on the Tree of Life 
a representation of the downward flow of the divine will from the top sephirot, 
Kether, to the lowest, Malkuth. The interpretation of each sphere, or card 
position, has been adapted to give a clearer path for using the tarot for 
divination, but also included are the traditional sphere meanings if you’d like to 
use this layout to look purely at your spiritual development. 

For Divination 

1 Your situation 

2 Responsibilities 

3 Limitations and the past 

4 What supports you 

5 What opposes you 

6 Achievements 

7 Attraction and relationships 

8 Work, health, and communication 

9 What is hidden 

10 The future environment; the outcome 


For Spiritual Insight 


1 Kether: Unity; spiritual growth 

2 Chockmah: Wisdom; the male principle 

3 Binah: Understanding; the female principle 

4 Chesed: Love; universal love, peace, and the law 

5 Geburah: Power and destruction; judgment and negative aspects 

6 Tiphareth: Beauty; the child, rebirth, and progress 

7 Netzach: Endurance; relationships and instinct 

8 Hod: The mind; communication, creativity, and intelligence 

9 Yesod: The unconscious mind; dreams, mysteries, and intuition 

10 Malkuth: The kingdom; the environment 




CARD 10 
















THE CHAKRA SPREAD 


This layout follows the positions of the seven principle chakras, or energy points 
of the body. Work with the seven card positions shown to answer your questions 
about these life aspects. You can also create a more detailed spread using the 
developing chakra points shown on pages 236-237, adding the heart seed, higher 
heart, fourth and fifth-eye chakras, alta major, soul star, stellar gateway, and 
earth star. 

7 Life goals; spirituality 
6 Intuition and trust 
5 Communication 
4 Love and relationships 
3 Energy, health and wisdom 
2 Creativity and projects 
1 Home, finances, and security 



















CARD INTERPRETATIONS: THE MAJOR 

ARCANA 


QUICK-REFERENCE MEANINGS 

0 The Fool 

Beginnings; risks 

I The Magician 

Action, ambition, and manifesting 

II The High Priestess 

Secrets, intuition, and learning 

III The Empress 

Creativity, resources, motherhood 

IV The Emperor 

Order, power, and boundaries 

V The Hierophant 

Unity, marriage, and education 

VI The Lovers 

Love; decisions 

VII The Chariot 

Progress; determination 

VIII Strength 

Management; endurance 

IX The Hermit 

Analysis; solitude 

X The Wheel of Fortune 

Luck; fate 

XI Justice 

Decisions; balance, legal affairs 

XII The Hanged Man 

Waiting; sacrifice 

XIII Death 

Transformation, change, and new 
beginnings 

XIV Temperance 

Negotiation 














XV The Devil 

Restriction 

XVI The Tower 

Breakdown and illumination 

XVII The Star 

Hope and guidance 

XVIII The Moon 

Crisis of faith; deep emotions 

XIX The Sun 

Growth and recovery 

XX Judgment 

The past; second chances 

XXI The World 

Success and completion 












Alternative Names: The Jester, The Idiot 

Number: 0 (can also be considered XXII or unnumbered, depending on the 
deck) 

Numerology Link: None of and all of the other major arcana cards 

Astrological Sign or Planet: Uranus 
Element: Air 
Hebrew Letter: Aleph 
Symbol: The ox 
Meaning: Instinct 

Tree of Life Pathway: First, between Kether and Chockmah 
Chakra: Crown, for spiritual connection, and base, for survival 
Key Meanings: Innocence, risk, and beginnings 
















THE FOOL ■ 


• >990 US Orr** 

















UNDERSTANDING THE FOOL 


The Fool is the innocent adventurer, about to begin an important journey. With a 
head full of hope, he is idealistic rather than practical; he is certainly not dressed 
for travel. The little dog at his heels tries to warn him of impending peril, but the 
Fool is blissfully ignorant of the risk he takes in stepping off a cliff. He is about 
to encounter danger, but how else can he make his way in the world? 

We all begin life as a zero, a tiny egg of potential. The Fool is the cosmic egg, 
symbolized by the shape of his number, 0. As he journeys through the major 
arcana sequence, he is a part of every card, but he also stands outside the 
sequence, without a formal value. An absolute beginner, he is about to explore 
the world, gain experience, and leave behind his status as a zero, a no-being. He 
will travel lightly, without the baggage of commitment. The Fool is the dreamer, 
lead only by his needs and desires. 

Usually depicted as a youth, the Fool must grow to become a man in the next 
card in the tarot sequence: the Magician—an individual who knows life and has 
identified what he needs to succeed in it. The Fool on his journey will collect, in 
his bag, the four symbols of the minor arcana suits (the Cup, Sword, Pentacle, 
and Wand): These items are the essence of his survival—the Cup to drink from; 
the Sword to defend himself; the Pentacle, a coin, for victuals; and the Wand to 
connect him with his higher self. At this stage of his journey, he is yet to 
discover the power and meaning of these objects; when he fully understands 
their purpose, he may progress to the next stage of life, ready to morph into card 
I, the Magician. Even though his number is zero, his preceding card is the World, 
card XXI. Some tarotists even assign him number XXII/0, to show that the Fool 
is both the end and the beginning of the card sequence. 


THE FOOL’S ASTROLOGY 

The FooFs element is Air, which is fitting, given he is about to step off a 
precipice into the ether and on his travels will go wherever the wind blows. 
While the Fool is not linked with a zodiac sign, he does have a planet, Uranus, 
which symbolizes independence and a free spirit. 


THE FOOL AND KABBALA 

The FooFs letter is Aleph, the first letter of the Hebrew alphabet. It has no sound 



—it is the breath, the chi, the life force of the universe. Life begins with a breath, 
as the Fool is the beginner in life. Aleph commonly means ox, for endurance, 
and also instinct, which drives the Fool on his journey. 

On the Tree of Life, he is placed on the first pathway between the spheres of 
Kether and Chockmah—denoting his journey from creation to wisdom. 


UPRIGHT MEANING 

The upright fool signifies calculated risk. It’s never too late to begin anew and 
follow your heart’s desire. The journey ahead is not without danger, but it is time 
to take a leap of faith. This card augers well for those embarking on new 
enterprises and educational courses, provided sensible planning is in place; this 
is a time for optimism and a fresh perspective. 

The Fool brings an opportunity to start over and feel young again or excited 
at the prospect of a new way of living; the Fool is an embodiment of your spirit, 
whether male or female, ready to explore and discover. Whatever you start now 
will go well, provided you do look before you leap—but once the decision is 
made, it’s time to push forward and not look back; have courage, commit to your 
path, and be fully in the moment. The Fool’s appearance in a reading can bring a 
sigh of relief, in that there is now a way ahead. Welcome in the new and travel 
lightly. 

Here are some insights the Fool can offer in particular areas of life: 

& Home: The Fool can show a young person leaving home for the first time. 
Also, surprise visitors could call. You may also have younger guests in your 
home. 

& Relationships: A new relationship—go with the flow at this point. 

& Career and money: You may have sabbatical or a new opportunity in your 
current job or a new career or enterprise. Prioritizing your workload is also 
the key to moving ahead swiftly. 


REVERSED MEANING 

Is what you’re proposing—or a situation offered to you—a leap too far? The 
Fool reversed brings out his irresponsible side, as his mouth works ahead of his 
brain. Without thinking through the downsides, the Fool makes decisions that are 


not wise. The reversed Fool leaps without awareness and so becomes the literal 
idiot, sabotaging his chances due to desperation and irrationality. Think carefully 
before agreeing a new approach to work and hold back from emotional 
commitments until you are sure of your ground. 


HIS WISDOM MESSAGE 

Leap, but look first. 


THE FOOL’S SYMBOLS 

In the Rider-Waite tarot, the Fool appears with these magical symbols. Some of 

them reappear in other major arcana cards, so learn to recognize them and you’ll 

soon find you can apply your knowledge throughout the deck. 

& The dog represents instinct and self-preservation. The animal tries to warn the 
Fool that he is about to walk off a cliff, but the Fool is oblivious to his 
warning. 

See this symbol on card XVIII, The Moon. 

& The white rose or butterfly: The white rose stands for purity and innocence. 
Some cards show the Fool with a butterfly, a symbol of dreams and spirit. 

See the white rose symbol on card XIII, Death. 

& The bundle: The Fool carries little in his bundle—just his essentials and four 
talismans, the symbols of the minor arcana. 

& The white sun: This is a symbol of consciousness, of the workings of the 
mind that are directly expressed. As the sun rises, it illuminates the Fool’s 
world, showing it all in the best possible light. The sun is white, which links 
with the Fool’s chakra of the crown and has purity of spirit. 

See the golden sun on card VI, The Lovers; XIV, Temperance; XIII, 

Death; XVIII, The Moon; and XIX, The Sun. 

& The red feather: The red feather in the Fool’s cap denotes his life force. 

See this symbol on card XIX, The Sun, and XIII, Death. 


THE HISTORICAL FOOL: IDIOT AND JOKER 

In the earliest tarots, the Visconti-Sforza, the Fool looks very different 
from the jester-boy we see on twentieth-century decks. With feathers in his 
hair and his breeches down to his knees, the historical Fool is a figure of 
ridicule—the village idiot, without dignity—yet the overarching theme of 
the Fool of Renaissance Europe was as a signifier of Lent. The seven 
chicken feathers in his hair and his traveler’s bundle represent a poor man. 
He is not a court jester but rather a symbol of poverty, a temporary 
reminder that worldly goods are not everything; what is in our hearts is 
more important. 

The Fool archetype was part of the Roman festival of Saturnalia (see 
page 11) in which the major arcana characters paraded in chariots while the 
Fool ran around to tease and torment them. This is another reason why he 
is unnumbered—he had no official place in the procession. The Fool 
survives today as the Joker in the standard fifty-two pack of playing cards. 


THE FOOL’S REFLECTIONS 

The beginner aspect of the Fool is held in the minor arcana’s four Aces: the Ace 
of Cups (new love), the Ace of Pentacles (new money), the Ace of Wands (new 
initiatives), and the Ace of Swords (new success); see pages 120, 148, 204, and 
176. He is also reflected in the Three of Wands, for travel, and the Eight of 
Wands, for movement, messages, and activity. 


TRY A READING WITH THE FOOL 

Take the Fool from your deck and set him before you. Now shuffle the 
remaining cards and cut the deck or fan the cards out facedown. Choose five 
cards with your left hand and lay them out, as shown. You could ask, “What do I 
need to do to follow my path in life?” or “Is this risk worth taking?” 

h? Card 1: You and your situation 
















& Card 2: The risks 
& Card 3: The potential rewards 
& Card 4: What you can gain 

Card 5: Advice and likely outcome 


CARD 2 


CARD 3 



CARD 1 


CARD 4 










I THE MAGICIAN 



Alternative Names: The Magus, The Juggler, The Mountebank 

Number: I 

Numerology Links: X, The Wheel of Fortune, and XIX, The Sun 
Astrological Sign or Planet: Mercury 
Element: Air; also ether, the quintessence 
Hebrew Letter: Beth (Beit) 

Symbol: House 
Meaning: Creativity 

Tree of Life Pathway: Second, between Kether and Binah 
Chakra: The palm chakras, for manifesting 
Key Meanings: Action, creativity, and success 
















THE MAGICIAN. 


• 1990 U S OamM SyMcmt me 




















UNDERSTANDING THE MAGICIAN 


Here we have a Magician in action, complete with magic wand and the 
implements of his trade on the table before him: the suit symbols of the Pentacle 
or coin, Cup, Sword, and Wand, representing the four elements of earth, water, 
air, and fire, respectively. With these base materials, he sets an intention to 
transmute them to create the fifth element of ether, or the quintessence—the 
mythological “breath of the gods.” The Magician, who once journeyed as the 
Fool, is now ready to manifest his desires by aligning spirit and matter. As the 
conduit between earth and heaven, the Magician stands for decisions and 
creativity. The roses and lilies growing above and below him tell us that life can 
be beautiful when we commit to our passions. 

In the major arcana sequence, the Magician comes after 0, The Fool, although 
the Magician can also be seen as the first card of the cycle, as some tarotists 
place the Fool after the World card as XXII. The Magician is the natural 
successor to the Fool as we move from 0, the cosmic egg, to I, the individual: 
The Fool’s bundle contains the Magician’s four symbols, ready to be activated. 
After the singular purpose of the Magician we meet II, The High Priestess, who 
introduces us to the duality of life—the now and the hereafter. 

The Magician’s number, I, is the first prime number, which stands for primal 
energy, the individual, and oneness with the divine spirit or God. The card is 
related to X, The Wheel of Fortune (10 reduces to 1), and XIX, or 19, The Sun, 
which reduces to 10 then 1, the Magician’s number. Both these cards link with 
an awareness of realms beyond the earthly plane. 


THE MAGICIAN’S ASTROLOGY 

The Magician’s ruling planet is Mercury, also the Roman god of magic—and the 
Greek Hermes, god of communication, linked with the Egyptian god Thoth. In 
alchemy, mercury’s form as quicksilver was associated with transformation or 
the fifth element of ether. The element could also be signified by the symbol of a 
snake, shown on the Magician’s serpent-girdle (see The Magician’s Symbols). 


THE MAGICIAN AND KABBALA 

The Hebrew letter of the Magician is Beth, symbolized by a house, meaning 
creativity. On the Tree of Life pathway, the Magician is placed on the second 



pathway between the spheres of Kether and Binah. Kether stands for unity, 
echoing the card’s number, I, while Binah is the sphere of experience— 
indicating practical magic and singular direction. 


UPRIGHT MEANING 

It’s time for action—for communicating and expressing your ideas and desires. 
This is the card of the inventor, the traveler, the self-employed, and the 
entrepreneur, as it beckons you to broaden your horizons. You will have the 
drive to spur your plans forward, and, perhaps, to take new, creative approaches: 
to think laterally, ask questions, trust your internal guidance, and let go of 
procrastination. 

Blessed with a magic wand, you have the ability to transform whatever you 
choose, and in this way, the Magician is a very positive card in a reading. He 
directs you to make the most of your skills and talents and step into your power; 
focus on your projects and capitalize on your personal strengths. Spiritually, the 
Magician shows you connecting with your higher, or true, self and acting with 
pure intention. 

This card can also show a significant journey. 

Here are some other possibilities: 

& Home: A house sale is completed, or you decide it is time to move forward 
with remodeling plans. This is a sociable time, with lots of visitors and 
entertaining. 

& Relationships: If you are single and want love, it is coming. If you are in a 
relationship, the Magician shows love in action, so you will begin to see 
commitment. Communication between you is excellent and you reach an even 
deeper understanding of each other’s needs. The card can also show you 
acting as one, so a joint project may be on the horizon, too. 

Career and money: There will be a new beginning, either finding new 
employment or a new direction in your existing work. This card can also 
show inspired leadership from a grounded and enthusiastic individual. 


REVERSED MEANING 

When the good Magician is reversed, he turns trickster, so this card can show 


you being mislead by a charming manipulator. What you see is not what you get, 
and it’s all show, not truth. In your projects, the Magician reversed can show a 
creative block as you feel torn between two paths or choices that get in the way 
of progress. It’s time to choose one option and commit to it fully. The reversed 
card can also reveal delays to travel plans and miscommunication in general. 


HIS WISDOM MESSAGE 

Manifest your desires. 


THE MAGICIAN’S SYMBOLS 

In the Rider-Waite tarot, the Magician appears with the following magical 

symbols. Some of them reappear in other major arcana cards, so learn to 

recognize them and you’ll soon find you can apply your knowledge throughout 

the deck. 

& The lemniscate or infinity symbol: balance, activity, and renewal 

See this symbol on card VIII, Strength. 

& The magic wand: The wand is double-ended and reflects the Hermetic 
concept “As above, so below,” or heaven and earth as mirrors. The wand’s 
symbolism reflects that of the Magician’s pose (see below). 

See this symbol on cards VII, The Chariot, and XXI, The World. 

& The four suit symbols: These are the Magician’s resources. He draws upon the 
four elements of the suits to create the quintessence, the fifth element. 

& The red cloak: energy and action; practicality; and being grounded in the 
material world 

See this symbol on IV, The Emperor; V, the Hierophant; and XI, Justice. 

& The headband: The mind and the intention to manifest desires 

& The Magician and his pose: The Magician is the conduit of energy between 
earth, which he draws from with his downward left hand, and heaven, 
symbolized by his raised hand and wand. 

& The serpent-girdle: The belt around the Magician’s waist is a serpent, a 
symbol of the element of Mercury, the Magician’s ruling planet (see The 
Magician’s Astrology). To function as a belt, the serpent or snake must hold 


its tail in its mouth. This is the alchemical symbol of the ouroborus, which 
like the lemniscate stands for infinity and constant renewal—just as the snake 
continually sheds its skin. 

& The roses and lilies: The red roses symbolize love and the lilies, truth of 
purpose. The Magician acts with pure intention. 

See red roses on the gown in card III, The Empress, and on the gown of 
the supplicant on the left on card V, The Hierophant; roses are also around 
the waist of the maiden on VIII, Strength. 

& Yellow background: consciousness, clear sight and support 

See this on III, The Empress; VII, The Chariot; VIII, Strength; and XI, 
Justice. 


THE HISTORICAL MAGICIAN: MAN AND 
GOD 

Historically, the Magician has had many guises. In the fifteenth-century 
Visconti-Sforza tarots, he was a wealthy merchant seated at a table. By the 
nineteenth century, the Dotti tarot of Milan assigned him as a cobbler —II 
Bagatto. By the twentieth century, he had transformed into a magus, then a 
god. 

Most early tarots show the Magician seated at a table, while a standing 
pose appears to have been generally accepted by the sixteenth and 
seventeenth centuries, as seen in Marseilles-style tarots. But in our Rider- 
Waite deck, the standing Magician takes on a spiritual dimension, pointing 
to heaven and earth. Aleister Crowley takes the Magician a step further in 
his Thoth deck, showing his Magus card as the winged messenger-god 
Hermes, or Mercury, also the ruling planet of the card. Hermes as a god 
represented wisdom and was believed to be the architect of the pyramids 
and the creator of mathematics, astrology, and other arts. The Magician 
today embodies this spirit of invention, enterprise, and expression. 


THE MAGICIAN’S REFLECTIONS 

Because the Magician has all four suits represented on his table—Cup, Pentacle, 
Sword, and Wand—he can be seen as the ruler of the entire minor arcana. His 
appearance in a reading can ask you to pay particular attention to the minors— 
note which suits or elements they represent, as this will give you an instant 
overview of which life area is important now. 


TRY A READING WITH THE MAGICIAN: THE MAGIC 
WAND 


Take the Magician from your deck and lay him before you, as shown. Now 
shuffle the remaining cards and cut the deck or fan out the cards facedown. 
















Choose four cards with your left hand and place them around the Magician in the 
positions below. You could ask, “What can I manifest?” or “What do I need to 
do to make my idea work?” 

v'? Card 1: Your situation 
& Card 2: Emotional strengths 
& Card 3: Practical skills and resources 
vfv Card 4: The outcome 






CARD 4 


CARD 3 


CARD 2 


CARD 1 











Alternative Name: The Papess 
Number: II 

Numerology Links: XI, Justice, and XX, Judgment 

Astrological Sign or Planet: The Moon 
Element: Water 
Hebrew Letter: Gimel 
Symbol: Camel 
Meaning: Wisdom 

Tree of Life Pathway: Third, between Kether and Tiphareth 

Chakra: Fifth eye, also known as the angelic or soma chakra, for psychic 
activation 


Key Meanings: Secrets, wisdom, and the spiritual world 

















THE HIGH PRIESTESS} 


• 'MOUS OtnM Inc 














UNDERSTANDING THE HIGH PRIESTESS 


The High Priestess stands in an enclosed chamber or temple between two great 
pillars labeled B and J. Behind her is a veil decorated with pomegranates and 
date fruit; she wears a horned moon headdress like the Egyptian goddess Hathor, 
and at her feet lies a crescent moon. She holds a scroll that is partly hidden, 
bearing the letters t, o, r, and a, indicating the Torah, the Jewish sacred text. 

She represents the principle of the divine feminine; historically, she is the 
female Pope, a virgin priestess, signified by her blue-and-white robes. Today, she 
might be the psychic, astrologer, or spiritual teacher. Her spiritual path is above 
material values and earthly relationships. Her gift is wisdom; and knowledge of 
the world beyond the veil, the realms of gods, guides, and angels. 

The number of the High Priestess is II, echoed in the two pillars of the temple 
of Solomon (see The High Priestess’s Symbols). Her counterpart in the major 
arcana sequence is card V, The Hierophant or High Priest. Like the High 
Priestess, he is a mentor, but he works in public office—the High Priestess, 
however, tends her inner garden of the spirit in secret, walking between the earth 
plane and the celestial realms beyond, separated by the pomegranate veil. She 
lives a dual life. She comes after I, The Magician, card of unity and outward 
expression, and before card III, The Empress. The High Priestess reveals that we 
need superconsciousness and awareness of the self before we can wholly engage 
in abundant relationships with others, which are embodied by the mother- 
goddess Empress. 

She is numerologically linked with cards XI, Justice (11; 1 + 1 = 2), and XX, 
Judgment (2 + 0 = 2). Both these cards illuminate the need for discernment, 
wisdom, and discretion. 


THE HIGH PRIESTESS’S ASTROLOGY 

The High Priestess’s element is Water, the element of the emotions, and her 
planet is the moon. The moon relates to intuition, the feminine cycles, and the 
rhythms of nature. She wears a crown showing the moon’s waxing, waning, and 
full phases (see The High Priestess’s Symbols). 


THE HIGH PRIESTESS AND KABBALA 

The High Priestess’s kabbalistic letter is Gimel, the third letter of the Hebrew 



alphabet, which literally means camel, but also suggests wisdom. On the Tree of 
Life, she is placed on the third pathway, between the spheres of Kether and 
Tiphareth, or oneness with God and harmony/rebirth—a journey to inner peace. 


UPRIGHT MEANING 

Hidden knowledge, intuition, psychic experience, and significant dreams are the 
gifts of the High Priestess. This is a time for incubation and privacy, to go 
inward, deepening your relationship with your higher self and trusting your 
internal knowing. In your everyday life, confidentiality is key. If you have a 
secret, or a project you are nurturing, it is better to keep your own counsel. 

On your spiritual path, the High Priestess predicts learning and a mentor. As 
the card of psychic gifts (along with card X, The Wheel of Fortune), her arrival 
in your reading can be a sign to follow your intuition and connect with your 
guides. If the High Priestess shows up in one of your first tarot readings, this is 
often a sign that tarot is part of your spiritual journey. 

Here are some other signs she can reveal: 

& Home: It’s a quiet time. Relations between family members may be calm but 
a little distant; you may be buried in your separate lives just now. 

& Relationships: This can mean being single for a time or, if you are in a 
relationship, you or your partner choosing to keep a part of your life separate, 
or secret. 

& Career and money: Success is coming, but contracts and new work are 
taking time to nurture. You can only be patient. 


REVERSED MEANING 

When reversed, the High Priestess can show an inappropriate mentor or 
choosing a temporarily wrong path. You might be listening to bad advice or 
someone might try to persuade you to go against your intuition. It can also 
indicate secrets that need to be out in the open; knowledge locked up too long 
may be potentially harmful. 


HER WISDOM MESSAGE 


Explore your spiritual side. 


THE HIGH PRIESTESS’S SYMBOLS 

In the Rider-Waite tarot, the High Priestess appears with these magical symbols. 

Some of them reappear in other major arcana cards, so learn to recognize them 

and you’ll soon find you can apply your knowledge throughout the deck. 

& The two pillars: The initials B and J refer to Boaz and Jachin, names on 
pillars in the Temple of Solomon in the Old Testament, which were decorated 
with pomegranate designs (see pomegranate below). Boaz represents the 
elements of Water and Earth, and Jachin, Fire and Air. The pillars are black 
and white, to show duality—male and female, darkness and light, and the 
earthly and heavenly dimensions that the High Priestess inhabits. The pillars 
form a portal to otherworldly experience and a deeper experience of the self. 
See this symbol on cards V, The Hierophant, and XI, Justice, to symbolize 
balance. 

& The scroll: The High Priestess holds the Sefer Torah, a hand-written scroll 
central to the study of Kabbala. It symbolizes the High Priestess’s spiritual 
knowledge. 

See the book as a symbol on card X, The Wheel of Fortune. 

& The pomegranate: On the High Priestess’s veil, the pomegranate denotes 
female fertility, linking with her aspect as the Egyptian goddess Hathor (see 
the moon below). The pomegranate can also be a symbol of the Jewish sacred 
text—it has been taught that the fruit has 613 seeds, echoing the Torah’s 613 
biblical commandments. 

& The veil: The veil symbolizes the otherworld beyond the material world. 

& The date: Masculinity, complementing the female pomegranate 

& The moon: This is a symbol of the subconscious and the emotions that lie 
beneath the solar or external persona. The moon is shown in three phases as a 
crown to echo Hathor/Isis, the Egyptian goddess of life and fertility who gave 
birth to Ra, god of the sun. 

See this symbol on card XVIII, The Moon. 

& The blue-and-white robes: White is for purity, relating to the traditional 
virginity of the nun. Blue is for truth, as in “true blue.” 


THE HISTORICAL HIGH PRIESTESS: 
FEMALE POPES 

In the Visconti-Sforza tarots (see page 10), the High Priestess bears the 
likeness of Maria Visconti, a relative of the Duke of Milan, who 
commissioned some of the earliest tarot cards. Maria was a nun and a 
member of the Guglielmite sect, which believed that Christ would return to 
earth in 1300 and a female pope would rule. Maria, also known as Sister 
Manfreda, was chosen to become the first female pope—hence the card’s 
alternative name, The Papess. Before her ambition could be realized, she 
was burned at the stake as a heretic in 1300. 

The High Priestess as the Papess also links with the legend of St. Joan, 
chronicled in the thirteenth century by the Dominican monk Stephen of 
Bourbon. His myth tells of a ninth-century Englishwoman named Joan 
who eloped with a Benedictine monk. To disguise herself, she dressed as a 
man and named herself John of England. Her lover died, but she traveled 
to Rome, became a highly respected educator, and eventually was elected 
Pope. However, during the coronation procession she collapsed with labor 
pains, and her true identity as a woman was exposed. How she died varies 
according to different accounts—from instant demise after the birth, to 
being stoned to death, to being deposed and punished. Her child survived, 
and in the legend he was identified as the Bishop of Ostia, one of the 
diocese of Rome. 

In Marseilles-style tarots of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, 
the High Priestess wears a papal crown, but otherwise this learned woman 
is very much as we see her in the Rider-Waite card, seated and robed, 
holding a holy book. 


THE HIGH PRIESTESS’S REFLECTIONS 

& The Queen of Swords, for strength of will and following your path 
& The Eight of Pentacles, for study, knowledge, and reward 

















TRY A READING WITH THE HIGH PRIESTESS: THE 
ORACLE 


Take the High Priestess from your deck and lay her before you on your left-hand 
side. Now shuffle the remaining cards and cut the deck or fan out the cards 
facedown. Choose three with your left hand and place them as shown. You could 
ask, “What do I need to know now?” or “Is this person a positive influence?” 

Of? Card 1: The person or situation you are inquiring about 
Card 2: What you need to know 
& Card 3: The outcome 



CARD 1 


CARD 2 


CARD 3 










Alternative Name: The Mother 
Number: III 

Numerology Links: XII, The Hanged Man, and XXI, The World 

Astrological Sign or Planet: Venus 
Element: Earth 
Hebrew Letter: Daleth 
Symbol: Door 
Meaning: Attainment 

Tree of Life Pathway: Fourth, between Binah and Chockmah 
Chakras: Heart, for love, and sacral, for fertility 
Key Meanings: Abundance, generosity, and creativity 


















II 



THE EMPRESS. 


« two us 














UNDERSTANDING THE EMPRESS 


The Empress is the mother archetype, symbol of creativity and abundance. She 
bears the symbol of Venus on her shield, relating to her planet, Venus, and the 
Roman goddess of love. In pre-Roman times, Venus was much more than the 
ruler of relationships: She was the earth mother, nature herself. 

She is seated in an earthly paradise, where corn grows at her feet. A river 
meanders then flows into a waterfall, forming an abundant pool. All the trees are 
in full leaf. This is summer, a time of harvest and plenty. The Empress leans 
slightly back, supported by a cushion and bolster, as if she has transplanted 
herself from indoors to her garden. While living in the material world, she stays 
connected to her roots and goes with the flow of life. Her pose and lose gown 
may suggest she is pregnant, and some decks show an obviously pregnant 
Empress. While the High Priestess is lunar and virginal, incubating herself 
spiritually to connect with the twilight realms beyond, the Empress manifests her 
femininity. She is the solar, earthly, and fertile aspect of womanhood, also 
indicated by the rich yellows, reds, oranges, and green colors of her card. 

Her number, III, is dynamic and creative and stands for the triad of mother, 
father, and child. In early decks such as the Visconti-Sforza tarots, she is shown 
with a black eagle, matching the insignia of card IV, The Emperor—she is 
clearly an empress rather than a queen; the four Queens are her aspects (see The 
Empress’s Reflections). As the consort of card IV, The Emperor, the Empress 
also represents the wife and traditional relationships. She is numerologically 
connected with XII, The Hanged Man—time suspended, presumably during 
pregnancy—and XXI, The World, expressing the joy of birth or creation. 


THE EMPRESS’S ASTROLOGY 

The Empress is linked with Venus, planet of love, and with warmth, 
relationships, light, and abundance. 


THE EMPRESS AND KABBALA 

The Empress’s Hebrew letter is Daleth, or door, and attainment. As a mother, she 
represents the gateway to new life. This also complements the Hebrew letter of 
her tarot partner, the Emperor, which is Hei, the window: two aspects of the 
house of the soul. 



On the Tree of Life, she is placed on the fourth pathway between the spheres 
of Binah and Chockmah. Binah is female intelligence, while Chockmah is male 
wisdom. The seeds of male and female within the Empress conceive new life. 


UPRIGHT MEANING 

The gifts of the Empress are abundance and material comfort, sensuality and 
security, and emotional support. This is an auspicious card for children and 
families, showing harmony at home; if you are hoping to begin a family, the 
Empress symbolizes fertility and femininity. Your creative projects thrive and 
you prosper financially now, too. The Empress is resourceful, so when she 
appears in your reading, you can feel assured that your needs will be met. This 
card, therefore, shows the influence of a nurturing mother figure who supports 
you. As the you/your situation card in a reading, it reveals you are a good mother 
to others—and to yourself. 

Here are some additional possibilities: 

& Home: renovation and extensions, home improvements; considering a move 
to a larger home; tending a garden 

& Relationships: Happiness—If single, this indicates a good time to begin a 
relationship. Harmonious relationships exist within the family. 

vfO Career and money: Security; money flows—In work, you are resourceful, 
able to support others, and come up with inventive ways to manage your 
projects. 


REVERSED MEANING 

When reversed, the Empress shows financial issues and domestic strife. This 
may take the form of a controlling and disruptive influence at home. She can 
also show a creative block in your projects and someone who is needy and takes 
too much from you. The result of these challenges and demands is stressful, and 
there may be an impact on fertility if this is an issue for you now—literally in 
terms of conceiving a child or figuratively in terms of finding the time and peace 
of mind to grow an idea. 


HER WISDOM MESSAGE 

Life is abundant. 


THE EMPRESS’S SYMBOLS 

In the Rider-Waite tarot, the Empress appears with these magical symbols. Some 

of them reappear in other major arcana cards, so learn to recognize them and 

you’ll soon find you can apply your knowledge throughout the deck. 

& The starry crown: The half-crown, or diadem, holds twelve stars, a common 
emblem on paintings of the Virgin Mary; the Book of Revelation 12:1-2 
mentions a woman, interpreted as Mary, as, “Clothed with the sun, and the 
moon under her feet, and on her head a crown of twelve stars.” The twelve 
stars may signify the twelve tribes of Israel, and some tarotists associate them 
with the twelve astrological signs. The number twelve signifies unity. 

& The laurel wreath: The wreath the Empress wears just below her crown 
shows peace and success. 

See this victory symbol on the Six of Wands, the Two of Cups, and the 

Seven of Cups. 

& Pomegranates: The pomegranate design on the Empress’s dress denotes 
fertility, death, and rebirth and relates to the myth of the Greek goddess of the 
harvest, Demeter. The fate of her daughter, Persephone, was determined by 
Persephone eating the seeds of the pomegranate in the underworld (see The 
Historical Empress). 

See this symbol on card II, The High Priestess. 

& The pearl necklace: The seven pearls, meaning wisdom, also represent the 
seven major chakras in harmony—base, sacral, solar plexus, heart, throat, 
third eye, and crown (see page 235). The seven pearls also link with the seven 
classical planets. 

& The shield with the sign of Venus: The Venus sign—the circle with the cross 
beneath—is associated with the goddess Venus, for love, beauty, and 
creativity. It embodies the sun and the earth. 

& The scepter: This is an emblem of state. The Empress is ruler of her own land 
and is secure in her authority. The orb atop it and the Empress’s hand position 
echoes the shape of the sign of Venus. (See Venus above.) 


& The corn: The ripe corn, ready for harvest, stands for rewards, fertility, and 
abundance. (See The Historical Empress.) 

& Yellow background: consciousness, clear sight, and support 

See this on the I, The Magician; VII, The Chariot; VIII, Strength; and XI, 
Justice. 


THE HISTORICAL EMPRESS: ROOTS OF 
THE GODDESS 

The Empress is the great mother goddess at the heart of many ancient 
beliefs: the Roman Venus and Diana; the Sumerian Innana, Queen of 
Heaven; the Celtic goddess Brigid; the Egyptian deities Hathor and Isis; 
the Virgin Mary; the Nordic goddesses Freyja and Frigg; the Greek 
Aphrodite and Gaia; and the Hindu Parvati. 

The ripe corn shown in the foreground of the card also associates the 
Empress with Demeter, the “grain mother,” Greek goddess of the harvest 
and the cycles of nature. When Demeter’s daughter, Persephone, was 
abducted by Hades, Demeter bargained to get her back by threatening to 
withhold the grain harvest. It was agreed that Persephone could return to 
her mother, but only if she had not eaten anything when with Hades. Alas, 
Persephone had eaten six seeds of the pomegranate (the fruit depicted on 
the dress of the Empress). And so Persephone was allowed to return to her 
mother and the earth for six months of the year, through spring and 
summer, but cursed to spend the other six months of fall and winter in the 
darkness that was Hades—a metaphor for the rhythms of the seasons that 
the mother-goddess Empress embodies. 


THE EMPRESS’S REFLECTIONS 

& The Queen of Cups, for love and nurturing—the heart aspect 
& The Queen of Pentacles, for generosity and security—the physical body 
& The Queen of Swords, for the intellect—the mind aspect 
& The Queen of Wands, for creativity and communication—the soul aspect 
& Nine of Pentacles, for money, luxury, and self-authority 


TRY A READING WITH THE EMPRESS: GROWING 
CREATIVITY AND ABUNDANCE 
















Take the Empress from your deck and lay her before you. Now shuffle all the 
remaining cards and then cut the deck or fan out the cards facedown. Choose 
three with your left hand and place them around the Empress as shown. You 
could ask, “How can I develop my ideas/be more creative?” or “How do I have 
more abundance in my life?” 

& Card 1: You/your present situation 

& Card 2: The source of abundance—where to focus your expectation and 
attention 

vfv Card 3: The outcome 



CARD 2 




CARD 1 


CARD 3 













Alternative Name: The Grandfather 
Number: IV 

Numerology Link: XIII, Death 
Astrological Sign or Planet: Aries the Ram 
Element: Fire 
Hebrew Letter: Hex ( Heh ) 

Symbol: Window 
Meaning: Progress 

Tree of Life Pathway: Fifth, between Tiphareth and Chockmah 
Chakra: Base, for security 

Key Meanings: Control, security, order, and ambition 
















THE EMPEROR. 


• 1990 U S 



























UNDERSTANDING THE EMPEROR 


The Emperor is the father archetype, a symbol of male power and virility. His 
beard shows he is a man of maturity and wisdom, a forerunner of the Hermit, the 
other bearded man of the tarot, whom the Emperor will become in later years. 

Yet at this time of his existence, he is still full of vigor and ready to take action 
to defend his realm, as we see from the battle armor showing beneath his robes 
of state. 

His number is IV, for the four compass points and for stability and order. The 
Emperor is sure of his position, and he sits squarely in place on his throne of 
stone, high-backed and secure in a landscape that appears to be little more than 
barren rock. Yet the mountains, almost equal in height on each side, seem to 
protect him, and his throne, higher than the peaks of the rocks, suggests he is in 
control of this strange environment. A tiny river runs behind him, perceptible at 
the base of the mountains—a sign of the potential for growth and cultivation of 
the land as he directs. The Emperor is a pioneer and a true Aries, shown by the 
rams’ heads on his throne; his will drives him forward. 

And as the Emperor knows the boundaries of his territory, he is realistic about 
the sphere of his influence. He also maintains and defends his boundaries 
appropriately, through rational negotiation rather than force. 

In the major arcana sequence, the Emperor comes after his consort card III, 
The Empress, and before card V, The Hierophant. In traditional societies, this 
sequence reflected power status, from mother under father and priest at the top, 
being closest to God. The Emperor corresponds in numerology with card XIII, 
Death, perhaps linking with the Emperor’s warrior aspects in that physical death 
would have been very much part of life as a feudal ruler. The Emperor and Death 
are the only two major arcana cards that show figures with visible leg armor. 


THE EMPEROR’S ASTROLOGY 

The Emperor’s astrological sign is Aries, the Ram the first sign of the zodiac 
(March 21-April 20). He has fire and determination, the qualities of leadership. 
Aries is ruled by Mars, planet of war, indicated by the Emperor’s armor. It is 
known as the fiery planet, echoed in the color orange in the landscape behind the 
Emperor’s throne and his red robes, which are also a sign of his sovereignty. 



THE EMPEROR AND KABBALA 


The Emperor’s Hebrew letter is Hex, which means progress. Another meaning of 
Hex is window, or portal, through which streams the light of consciousness. He is 
fully aware of who he is and of his place in the world. Placed on the fifth Tree of 
Life pathway between the spheres of Tiphareth, for beauty and rebirth, and 
Chockmah, male principle. 


UPRIGHT MEANING 

In a reading, the Emperor can denote a powerful man, and the traditional male 
aspects of rulership and ambition. As the consort of card III, The Empress, he 
signifies the husband or other intimate partner who is constant and trustworthy. 
He is in control of his emotions, and comfortable with who he is. Less appealing, 
depending on your perspective, is his need for conformity. Although he may 
have ambition, tradition is essential to his happiness. 

As a general influence or symbol of the self he brings balance, security, and 
conventional values. He reveals mastery of life and control over territory, and 
predicts that problems can be overcome with careful planning and single- 
mindedness. He shows a return to order, so his arrival in your reading is a 
welcome sign of improvement in your circumstances. You may also be offered 
protection from someone you trust; you can also trust yourself to make the right 
decisions. 

It’s time to live in the here and now, and use what practical resources you 
possess—wisdom, determination, and the skills of others—to realize your next 
steps. Be the leader. 

Here’s what he represents in specific areas of your life: 

& Home: Order and smooth running. However, it is also important to set 
boundaries and protect what is yours. 

& Relationships: A new partner, or focusing on practical matters and future 
planning in established partnerships. Loyalty in love. 

% Career and money: Finances get organized and you plan how to balance 
expenditures. You can expect to have fairness at work and to be sure of your 
goals; you will either enjoy this new structure or feel it stifles your creativity. 


REVERSED MEANING 


When reversed, the Emperor is power-hungry and excessive in his demands, and 
represents the negative traits associated with traditional masculinity, such as 
being domineering, controlling, and even cruel. Greed is another aspect of the 
Emperor reversed. Whereas the upright Emperor knows his boundaries, the 
reversed Emperor does not know where to draw the line and may use excessive 
force or persuasion to get what he wants. This card therefore shows issues with 
authority figures and other potentially domineering individuals who are run by 
their egos. 


HIS WISDOM MESSAGE 

Take control; you are protected. 


THE EMPEROR’S SYMBOLS 

In the Rider-Waite tarot, the Emperor appears with these magical symbols. Some 
of them reappear in other major arcana cards, so learn to recognize them and 
you’ll soon find you can apply your knowledge throughout the deck. 

& The rams ’ heads: There are four ram’s heads on the card, echoing his number 
IV: two forward-facing on the front of his throne and two in profile on the top 
corners. They are the symbol of the Emperor’s sign, Aries the Ram. In 
Egyptian mythology, Khnum, an aspect of the sun god, Ra, was depicted with 
the head of a ram. Khnum was a god of creation, also known as the Divine 
Potter, who molded children from the clay of the Nile. 

& The golden apple and ankh: The stylized ankh, the Egyptian symbol for life 
and reproduction, stands for masculine virility. The Emperor holds the ankh 
in his right hand—the hand associated with giving. In his left hand, he shows 
what he receives: the golden apple, symbol of love and sexuality associated 
with the Roman goddess Venus. Venus’s symbol appears on the Empress, the 
Emperor’s partner. In this way the ankh and apple denote their relationship 
and the male and female archetypes. 

& Armour: The armour is a symbol of strength, defense, and action in the world. 
Battle is a quality of the planet Mars, ruler of the Emperor’s sign of Aries. 


See this symbol on card VII, The Chariot. 

& The red cloak: energy and action; being in the material world 

See this symbol on card I, The Magician; V, The Hierophant; and XI, 
Justice. 

& The crown: A power symbol, the Emperor’s crown sits on the crown chakra 
of the head, the connection point with the higher self. It shows autonomy and 
self-direction. The crown is closed, showing the Emperor’s self-containment 
and self-reliance. 

See variants of the crown on II, The High Priestess; III, The Empress; V, 
The Hierophant; VII, The Chariot; VIII, Strength; XI, Justice; XVI, The 
Tower; the Six of Wands; the Ace of Swords; the Four of Pentacles; and 
the Kings and Queens of the minor arcana suits. 


THE HISTORICAL EMPEROR: WENCESLAS 
AND CHARLEMAGNE 

One of The Emperor’s historical emblems is the black eagle, which 
appears on his hat in the Visconti-Sforza tarots (see page 10) —the bird was 
an insignia of the Visconti family and the Holy Roman Empire, which gave 
the family official permission to bear it. The historical Emperor may be 
Wenceslas of Bohemia (1205-1253), who married into the family of 
Roman Emperor Frederick I; other sources suggest the original Emperor 
may be Charlemagne, the first Holy Roman Emperor (c. 742-814). The 
Marseilles tarot (1701-1715) shows the Emperor side-on, just as we would 
see the profile of kings and other dignitaries on coins and playing cards. 


THE EMPEROR’S REFLECTIONS 

We can see aspects of the Emperor in these minor arcana cards: 

& The Four of Pentacles, for for financial stability 

& The King of Cups, for love and intuition—the heart aspect 

$x£ The King of Pentacles, for generosity and security—the physical body 

& The King of Swords, for the intellect—the mind aspect 

& The King Wands, for creativity and communication—the soul aspect 


TRY A READING WITH THE EMPEROR: KNOWING 
YOUR BOUNDARIES 

Take the Emperor from your deck and lay him before you in the center of the 
spread, as shown. Now shuffle the remaining cards and cut the deck or fan the 
cards out facedown. Choose four cards with your left hand and place them 
around the Emperor, as shown. You could ask, “Should I consider moving 
house?” or “How can I feel more secure?” 
















& Card 1: You/your situation 
Card 2: Past issues 
& Card 3: Hopes or fears 
& Card 4: Outcome 


CARD 3 


CARD 4 



CARD 1 


CARD 2 













Alternative Names: The High Priest, The Pope 

Number: V 

Numerology Link: IV, Temperance 
Astrological Sign or Planet: Taurus the Bull 
Element: Earth 

Hebrew Letter: Vau (Vav, Wav) 

Symbol: Nail or connector 
Meaning: Kindness 

Tree of Life Pathway: Sixth, Chesed and Chockmah 
Chakra: Causal, or fourth eye, for spiritual connection 
Key Meanings: Education, unity, spiritual and direction 














THE HIEROPHANT 


snout • 











































UNDERSTANDING THE HIEROPHANT 


The Hierophant appears as a figure of religious orthodoxy. Wearing the papal 
crown and holding the scepter, he makes the hand gesture of blessing to two 
supplicants kneeling before him. He is the leader of the Catholic faith and 
symbolizes unity. One of his titles, Pontifex Maximus, means “The Great 
Bridge-Builder”; he is the bridge between heaven and earth. He shows us the 
potential for integrating our internal and external worlds, bringing together body 
and soul, as well as our male and female self-aspects. As the priest, he officiates 
at weddings, joining two people together in physical and spiritual union. 

The Hierophant is also a symbol of education. Also know as the Priest or the 
Pope, in the Rider-Waite tarot, he is named Hierophant after the hierophantes, or 
priests who guarded the Eleusinian Mysteries (see The Historical Hierophant). 
Through him, we may find and follow a higher path through learning. He may be 
a lecturer or inspiring leader, priest or magus, shaman or established esoteric 
teacher. 

In the major arcana sequence, the Hierophant appears between card IV, The 
Emperor, and VI, The Lovers. We are moving from the Emperor’s worldly 
domain to an encounter with the spiritual through a teacher-priest. After the 
Hierophant, we meet the Lovers and see God’s messenger, Archangel Raphael, 
and then—through the sequence of these three cards—sense a progression from 
the earth realm to a glimpse of the divine. 

The Hierophant’s number is the indivisible V, the number of mankind, which 
indicates that he is the communicator between man and God, which is also 
shown by his hand gesture, symbolizing heaven and earth (see The Hierophant’s 
Symbols). He is numerologically linked with card XIV, Temperance (14; 1 + 4 = 
5, or V). The Angel of Temperance and the Hierophant are both channels for the 
message of God. 

THE HIEROPHANT’S ASTROLOGY 

The Hierophant’s sign is Taurus, the Bull the second sign of the zodiac (April 
21-May 21), ruled by sensuous planet Venus and the element of Earth, which is 
also represented by his red robes (see The Hierophant’s Symbols). This fixed 
sign of the zodiac has the attributes of commitment and loyalty, groundedness, 
and practicality. 



THE HIEROPHANT AND KABBALA 


The Hierophant’s kabbalistic letter is Vau, meaning nail or connector—the 
Hebrew letter resembles an / with a pen stroke to the left. Vau’s esoteric meaning 
is kindness. 

On the Tree of Life, he is placed on the sixth pathway between the spheres of 
Chesed, meaning mercy and divine love, and Chockmah, or wisdom and the 
male principle. Chockmah is also known as the Father of Fathers and points to 
the Hierophant as the eternal father-god, spiritual counterpart to the mother- 
goddess embodied in card III, The Empress. 


UPRIGHT MEANING 

In the upright position, the Hierophant shows support, self-realization, and 
expansion. This is a time to develop emotionally and spiritually—to commit to 
relationships; to think and philosophize; and to become more spiritually aware. 
In this way, the Hierophant offers an opportunity to integrate mind and spirit and 
ascend to a higher plane of awareness. Day to day, this means nurturing your 
talents through learning and heeding good advice. 

While the Hierophant offers wise counsel, he does represent institutions and 
traditional values—which may be a comfort to you or a test of how much you 
are willing to conform. Even if his conventions are not for you, the Hierophant 
offers an opportunity to question and define your values. 

As a spiritual leader, the Hierophant shows you the path to follow in a 
community, such as joining a study group or class through which you may learn 
a new skill. He also represents good judgment and fairness: The Hierophant asks 
you to tune your moral compass, so if you have been questioning a decision, it is 
time to do what is right. 

Here’s what else the Hierophant can symbolize: 

& Home: Expanding your current property; inviting people into your home to 
share your interests 

& Relationships: Committed partnerships; marriage; celebrating the sacred in 
your relationship 

Career and money: Progress in your organization; direction and decisions; 
inspired leadership and growth 


REVERSED MEANING 


When reversed, the Hierophant shows poor leadership. You may be mislead by 
an incompetent or egotistic individual at work or on your spiritual path. This is 
the card of the bad guru—the judgmental teacher who is more interested in 
furthering his ambitions than supporting you in yours. In work, the Hierophant 
reversed can also show institutions that need restructuring: poor advice, mistrust, 
and wrong decisions with moral repercussions. It is better to seek your own path 
than to stay with a mentor or plan that doesn’t suit your needs. Be a free spirit. 


HIS WISDOM MESSAGE 

Make the most of your gifts. 


THE HIEROPHANT’S SYMBOLS 

In the Rider-Waite tarot, the Hierophant appears with these magical symbols. 

Some of them reappear in other major arcana cards, so learn to recognize them 

and you’ll soon find you can apply your knowledge throughout the deck. 

& The papal crown: The triple crown is the symbol of papal authority. Its three 
layers stand for the holy trinity. 

& The papal staff, or crosier: The three crosses on the Hierophant’s staff stand 
for the Holy Trinity of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; earth, heaven, and the 
spirit world; and the self, higher self, and the Christ/fully actualized self. We 
also see the three crosses on the Hierophant’s papal robes, which are red, for 
earth, while the crosier is gold, for heaven. 

& The crossed keys: The golden crossed keys represent the keys to the kingdom 
of heaven given by Jesus to St. Peter. Jesus said to Peter, “Whatever you bind 
on earth shall be bound in heaven.” Heaven and earth are as one, a reminder 
of the Hierophant’s key meaning of unity. 

& The hand gesture of blessing: The blessing shows two fingers bent and two 
extended, representing what is seen and what is hidden from view—our 
visible earthly existence and the invisible heaven. The fingers are part of the 
same hand and, like the crossed keys, illustrate how our known and unknown 
worlds unite. 


& The red cloak: Energy and action; being in the material world 

See this symbol on cards I, The Magician; IV, The Emperor; and XI, 
Justice. 

& The roses and lilies: The red roses symbolize love and the white lilies, purity. 
See this symbol on cards I, The Magician; the roses around the waist of 
the maiden on VIII, Strength; and red roses on the gown of card III, The 
Empress. 


THE HISTORICAL HIEROPHANT: SECRET 
RITES 

The Hierophant was named in the Rider-Waite tarot after hierophant, a 
general term meaning someone who introduced others to holiness 
—hierophant in Greek was ta hiera and phainen, meaning to show. 
Hierophantes was also the title of the High Priests of the Greek religion of 
Eleusis, who officiated at the Eleusinian Mysteries. This was a famous 
initiation ceremony and festival that took place at Eleusis, near Athens. 

The rites were secret, but involved the afterlife and the retelling of the 
story of Demeter the grain mother and her daughter, Persephone, who was 
abducted by Hades (see the Empress, page 42). The Hierophant was 
always chosen from a family named Eumolpidae, who had a mythical 
ancestor, Eumolpus, whose parents were the gods Poseidon and Chione. 
The Hierophant was the keeper of sacred mysteries, and he was renowned 
for his beautiful and hypnotic voice—which perhaps explains the emphasis 
on listening in many Hierophant card interpretations. 

In early tarot cards, the Hierophant card was the Pope. The card’s title 
changed in some seventeenth- and eighteenth-century decks in response to 
religious sensitivity. For example, Jupiter replaced the Pope in the Tarot de 
Besancon of 1818, and Bacchus, god of wine, is the Pope of the Belgian 
tarot of 1770. 


THE HIEROPHANT’S REFLECTIONS 

We can see aspects of The Hierophant in these minor arcana cards: 

& The Nine of Wands, for defending your faith at any cost; protecting what is 
known 

& The Six of Cups, for familiarity, harmony, and the past 
& The Two of Cups, for love partnerships 

















TRY A READING WITH THE HIEROPHANT: FINDING A 
MENTOR OR SOUL MATE 

Take the Hierophant from your deck and lay him before you. Now shuffle the 
remaining cards and cut the deck or fan out the cards facedown. Choose three 
cards with your left hand and place them around the Hierophant as shown. You 
could ask, “Will I find a mentor at this time?” or “Will I have a soul connection 
with this person?” Interpret card 3, the outcome, using the yes/no list of major 
arcana cards on page 23. 

h? Card 1: Your situation 

& Card 2: The mentor you need or the person in question 
& Card 3: The outcome 


CARD 1 CARD 2 




CARD 3 














VI THE LOVERS 


Alternative Names: The Lover, Love 
Number: VI 

Numerology Link: XV, The Devil 
Astrological Sign or Planet: Gemini the Twins 
Element: Air 
Hebrew Letter: Zain 
Symbol: Sword 
Meaning: Soulfulness 

Tree of Life Pathway: Seventh, between Tiphareth and Binah 

Chakra: Heart chakra, for love and healing 

Key Meanings: Love and relationships, maturity, and decisions 




















THE LOVERS. 


• 1990us Own** 













UNDERSTANDING THE LOVERS 


Two Lovers arrive in a magical garden where strange flowers bloom and snakes 
talk. The full sun beams behind a luminous Archangel Raphael, angel of love 
and healing, who presides over their union. 

The Lovers stand in the Garden of Eden together, yet the woman, Eve, is 
gazing up at Archangel Raphael, who is holding up his right hand, explaining to 
them that they will be cast out of the garden if they eat the fruit from the Tree of 
Knowledge of Good and Evil. Their innocent paradise will end—a metaphor for 
the seeming perfection of a new relationship before we must negotiate the 
practicalities. The man, Adam—who could also be the Fool on his journey 
through the tarot—gazes directly at Eve. They may be called the Lovers, but 
they are not Lovers yet: See the clouds between them? The clouds predict the 
Fall and the hurdles they will overcome as their relationship becomes grounded 
in reality. All looks perfect in Eden, but Eve and Adam are only just about to 
recognize each other and know love. From this point onward, we know the snake 
will tempt Eve to eat the fruit, and their relationship will change forever. 

In the major arcana sequence, the Lovers arrive after card V, The Hierophant. 
One of his meanings is marriage and the integration of male and female aspects. 
After the Lovers comes card VII, The Chariot—we have made our love decision, 
and the tension released drives us forward. 

The Lovers’ number is VI, the number of harmony, love, and growth. It is 
also associated with healing and so links with the healing Archangel Raphael. 
The card’s numerological link is XV, The Devil, who stands for the shadow side 
of love, when issues of control and possessiveness take hold. 


THE LOVERS’ ASTROLOGY 

The Lovers’ sign is Gemini, the Twins (May 22-June 21), or the dual aspects of 
male and female, light and shadow. Loving our whole selves, in all our aspects, 
raises our consciousness to love God/the universe/the Great Spirit as the creator 
of the divine spark within. Eve is also Adam’s twin, as she was created from 
him. 


THE LOVERS AND KABBALA 

The Lovers’ Hebrew letter is Zain, or sword—it can also connote the penis. As 



swords are the suit of Air in the tarot and symbolize clear thought and action, 
this relates to the card’s meaning of decisions. The tarotist Jonathan Dee also 
comments, “It is also interesting to note that Adam and Eve were expelled from 
the Garden [of Eden] by an angel with a sword.” Zain can also mean soulfulness 
or living with an awareness of our higher selves. 

The Lovers is placed on the seventh pathway on the Tree of Life between the 
spheres of Tiphareth, for beauty, rebirth, and ascending consciousness, and 
Binah, for understanding, the goddess, and the female principle. 


UPRIGHT MEANING 

The Lovers show relationships and a decision. The card can predict meeting a 
new partner or a career opportunity, and your choice now will have a significant 
effect on your future. In the upright position, the person coming into your orbit 
now has a positive influence and offers true love—provided you follow the 
guidance of your heart rather than your head. If you are willing to take a risk 
rather than stay with a safe choice, you may soon discover your own Garden of 
Eden, which is fertile and rich with possibility. 

If you are already in a relationship, a decision whether to take your 
partnership to a deeper level will be made. The issue that the Lovers card raises 
is your ability to make a decision based on your long-term future rather than 
short-term gains. In this way, you are being asked to make a mature decision that 
supports your true needs—respect, intimacy, love, and trust—and to connect 
with a partner who is emotionally available to you. 

Whatever your situation, the message is to follow your heart’s desire. 

An additional meaning of the Lovers card is a young person leaving home 
and making independent decisions. 

& Home: If you’re not living in your dream home, now is the time to work 
toward a property and location that will support your dreams and desires. 

& Relationships: A love decision—Look at your patterns in previous 

relationships and see what your current love, or prospective new partner, can 
offer you that is different and ultimately more fulfilling. If you are single, 
love yourself first to manifest the right relationship when the time comes. 

& Career and money: Career choices—One option may seem easier, but look 
carefully to ensure you are making the best decision in the long term. Look 
beyond money to your future development and ambitions. 


REVERSED MEANING 


When the Lovers card reverses, relationships go out of balance and the shadow 
side of your personalities enters the equation. A relationship is in crisis, and you 
may question your initial attraction as the values you once held as a couple feel 
corrupted. There may be inequality, betrayal, and dishonesty. The Lovers 
reversed is also an aspect of card XV, The Devil, which reveals lust, materialism, 
and addiction to negative patterns. 


THEIR WISDOM MESSAGE 

Follow the wisdom of your heart. 


THE LOVERS’ SYMBOLS 

In the Rider-Waite tarot, the Lovers appear with these magical symbols. Some of 

them reappear in other major arcana cards, so learn to recognize them and you’ll 

soon find you can apply your knowledge throughout the deck. 

& Archangel Raphael: The archangel of love and healing symbolizes spiritual 
wisdom and the healing power of love. Following the heart and committing to 
love as a life purpose heals us and heals others. 

See other Archangels on XIV Temperance (Archangel Michael), and XX 
Judgment (Archangel Gabriel). 

& The Tree of Life: Find this on the right of the card, behind the man; it stands 
for the male principle. It has twelve fruits representing the twelve signs of the 
zodiac. 

& The Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil: You can see this on the left of the 
card, behind the woman; it stands for the female principle. The tree’s fruit is 
sexual experience. 

& The snake: Risk and wisdom—In Christianity, it is the Fall of Man: Adam 
and Eve’s banishment from Eden when they ate the fruit of the Tree of 
Knowledge of Good and Evil. 


THE HISTORICAL LOVERS: WEDDINGS 
AND AFFAIRS 

In Renaissance Italy, the Visconti family commissioned an artist to paint a 
set of tarot cards to commemorate the marriage of Bianca Maria Visconti 
and Francesco Sforza, and the joining together of two of the most powerful 
families in Northern Italy. Married in 1441, portraits of Bianca and 
Francesco were painted on the Lovers card, in which they are shown 
holding hands under a canopy decorated with heraldic shields and symbols 
with a blind cupid hovering above. The Visconti-Sforza tarots were almost 
a family album, featuring not only Bianca Maria and Francesco, but Bianca 
Maria again on the Chariot and Sister Manfreda, believed to be a relative 
of the Visconti family, as the High Priestess (see page 40). 

In the Marseilles tarots, which may date from the fifteenth century, we 
see three people—two women and a man in the center. Cupid, who is not 
blindfolded, is about to shoot love’s arrow at the couple on the right— 
indicating that the man will have to choose one of the women as his 
partner. In the tarots of Court de Gebelin (Antoine Court, 1725-1784), 
which appeared in his book Le Monde Primitif (1781), cupid favors the 
couple on the left of the card. The French occultist Etteilla (Jean-Baptiste 
Alliette, 1738-1791) created a deck with a different structure to that of 
traditional tarot, but with a card equivalent to the Lovers numbered 13 and 
named “Mariage,” or marriage. Here, the central figure is a priest 
conducting a wedding ceremony. A. E. Waite’s card holds this structure of 
three people, but transformed the priest or cupid into the angel and draws 
upon the Lovers’ biblical lineage as Adam and Eve. 


THE LOVERS’ REFLECTIONS 

We can see aspects of the Lovers in these minor arcana cards: 

& The Ace of Cups, for love 
& The Two of Cups, for a new partnership 

















TRY A READING WITH THE LOVERS: THE LOVE 
DECISION 


Take the Lovers card from your deck and lay the card before you. Now shuffle 
the remaining cards and cut the deck or fan out the cards facedown. Choose six 
cards with your left hand and place them around the Lovers, as shown. You 
could ask, “What are my choices, and how do I choose?” 

vfv Card 1: The question 

Card 2: Background to the present situation 
& Cards 3 and 4: The choices 
& Card 5: The best action to take 
& Card 6: The outcome 


CARD 6 





CARD 1 













Alternative Name: Victory 
Number: VII 

Numerological Link: XVI, The Tower 
Astrological Sign or Planet: Cancer the Crab 
Element: Water 

Hebrew Letter: Heth (Chet, Cheth ) 

Symbol: Fence or enclosure 
Meaning: Guidance 

Tree of Life Pathway: Eighth, between Geburah and Binah 
Chakra: Throat, for truth 

Key Meanings: Determination, victory, and a journey 
















THE CHARIOT. 


• two US G*T«r» s*-»t*n». Inc 






















UNDERSTANDING THE CHARIOT 


The Chariot—or the charioteer—is the traveler, standing strong in his carriage of 
stone and flanked by two resting sphinxes. With the city and its river behind him, 
he is about to move on; with determination and self-control, he will keep his 
vehicle on the road and be successful in his quest. At this point, his concerns are 
practical and material rather than mystical, yet he is aware of the heavenly 
realms above him, shown by his canopy of stars and the astrological symbols on 
his belt. 

The Chariot is a culmination of the cards that precede him, and some symbols 
from cards 0 to VI are included on the card as evidence. About to embark on a 
journey, the Chariot echoes the youth aspect of the Fool. On the Chariot’s 
shoulder armor are crescent moons, for II, The High Priestess. His starry crown 
is like that of III, The Empress. The stone chariot resembles the Emperor’s 
throne, and its pillars those of the Hierophant’s chamber. The landscape evokes 
the Garden of Eden, home to card VI, The Lovers. The charioteer will soon find 
his karmic life path. To stay on it, he needs to draw together all his past 
experiences. 

Indivisible by any other number, VII is a number of unification, mirrored in 
the seven days of the week, the days of the creation of the universe, and, in 
classical wisdom, the then-seven planets of the solar system. Seven is also the 
sum of three and four, which tells us that the Chariot is the child of cards III and 
IV, the Empress and Emperor, wearing his mother’s crown and standing astride 
his father’s throne. His numerological correspondence is card XVI, The Tower. 
The shadow side of the Chariot is ego—which leads to destruction, or the Tower. 


THE CHARIOT’S ASTROLOGY 

The Chariot’s astrological sign is Cancer the Crab (June 22-July 23), ruled by 
the moon. The crab has a shell, a protective vehicle for the body, like the chariot 
itself. The Charioteer’s gauntlets have a shell-like frill at the forearms. 

The card also indicates the four fixed signs of Aquarius, Scorpio, Leo, and 
Taurus and their elements, which are symbolized by the sphinx. 


THE CHARIOT AND KABBALA 

The Chariot’s Hebrew letter is Chet, for fence or enclosure, a descriptor of the 



vehicle itself. The symbol of the square on the charioteer’s breastplate may also 
reference the square form of the Hebrew letter Mem, which, in the ancient 
kabbalistic text the Sefer Yetzirah, means King over Water and Formed Earth in 
the Universe—suggesting the the Chariot’s crossing of the river and reaching dry 
land, from where he commences his journey. 

In the kabbalistic Tree of Life, the Chariot is positioned on the eighth 
pathway between the spheres of Geburah, power and destruction, and Binah, 
meaning understanding and the female principle or creation. 


UPRIGHT MEANING 

The Upright Chariot signifies success and a major departure. This is a time for 
determination and focus as you travel in a new direction. A decision is made, and 
now you can begin to experience real progress in your affairs. Ready to take 
control and navigate your path, you are poised to learn as your horizons rapidly 
expand. Just as the charioteer has his wand to drive him onward, you will need 
willpower to fuel your desires. 

The Chariot can indicate a move or an important journey, and, on a mundane 
level, it shows you driving a car on your travels or getting a new vehicle. 
Following are some other possibilities: 

vU Home: Travel away from home is the focus now, rather than on extending or 
improving your home. You may also welcome travelers from other states or 
countries. Any disagreements with those you live with will be quickly 
overcome. 

& Relationships: A relationship progresses at a pace; if the cards around the 
Chariot show endings, you may be moving on alone—but this is your rightful 
path. 

& Career and money: Swift progress in business affairs—the opportunity 
coming your way will be challenging and exciting. Financially, you are on the 
road to success. 


REVERSED MEANING 

When reversed, there is arrogance and self-indulgence. This can show a person 
or event spiraling out of control. Ego is at work, and selfish needs come before 



the greater good, so the Chariot reversed can indicate recklessness and poor 
leadership. When the Chariot reverses and is tipped off the road, travel plans and 
house moves are disrupted or delayed. 


HIS WISDOM MESSAGE 

Take charge and reach for the stars. 


THE CHARIOT’S SYMBOLS 

In the Rider-Waite tarot, the Chariot appears with these magical symbols. Some 

of them reappear in other major arcana cards, so learn to recognize them and 

you’ll soon find you can apply your knowledge throughout the deck. 

& The chariot: The vehicle for the personality and self-expression; protection 
and progress 

& The black and white sphinxes : The sphinx is a symbol of unity in diversity 
because it embodies a human face, eagle wings, the body of a lion, and the 
tail of a bull, which relate also to the four elements, the four suits of the minor 
arcana, and the four fixed signs of the zodiac (see The Chariot’s Astrology). 

See this symbol on card X, The Wheel of Fortune. 

& The armor and breastplate: The charioteer’s armor symbolizes protection on 
his journey. On his breastplate, the alchemical symbol of the square signifies 
the four corners of the earth. The moon faces on the shoulder armor represent 
the divination stones, urmin and thummin, which in the Old Testament were 
used to divine God’s will; it is suggested that the stones were cast to answer 
to a serious matter, such the decision to go to war. 

& The robes: The written characters on the charioteer’s robe are protective 
talismans. On the belt are some undefined symbols, believed to be signs of 
the zodiac. 

& The crown: This is a symbol of authority. This crown has an eight-pointed 
star—this is the star from card XVII, The Star, a symbol of hope (see page 
98). A laurel wreath is worn underneath it, symbolizing victory. 

See this symbol on III, The Empress, and XVII, The Star. 

& The winged sun disk: The winged sun belonged to the Egyptian god Horus 


and later to the sun god, Ra; the symbol may also relate to the Greek sun god, 
Helios, who rode the skies in his sun chariot. In this card, the symbol denotes 
solar power and the conscious mind. 

Yoni-lingham: This Hindu symbol, under the wing emblem on the front of the 
chariot, shows the feminine organ, the yoni, and the male lingam, pictured 
joined to symbolize the harmonious union of male and female aspects. 

The canopy of stars: This is a symbol of hope and direction and a link with 
the celestial realms, seen also on the zodiac symbols on the charioteer’s belt. 
See this symbol on card XVII, The Star. 

The magic wand: Power, creativity, and initiative 

See this symbol on card I, The Magician, and XXI, The World. 

Yellow background: Consciousness, clear sight, and support 

See this symbol on card I, The Magician; III, The Empress; VIII, 

Strength; and XI, Justice. 


THE HISTORICAL CHARIOT: THE 
PROCESSION OF TRIUMPHS 

The Chariot dates back to the victory parades of ancient Rome, when 
victors processed through the streets in their triumphal chariot— triumph, 
from which the word trump ( trionfi ) is derived, also another term for the 
major arcana cards of the tarot. The charioteer of this parade of heroes was 
probably recognized by the Roman spectators as their sun god, Sol, shown 
by the bright yellow sunlight on the Rider-Waite card. 

The people of Renaissance Italy continued this tradition, known as the 
procession of triumphs, during which allegorical figures appeared in 
triumphal carts to represent all the major arcana cards. The Visconti-Sforza 
tarot of the fifteenth century shows a chariot pulled by two white winged 
horses and in it a queen resembling Bianca Maria Visconti, the woman in 
the Lovers card (see The Historical Lovers, page 56). 


THE CHARIOT’S REFLECTIONS 

We can see aspects of the Chariot in these minor arcana cards: 

& The Three of Wands, for broadening horizons and travel 
& The Eight of Wands, for travel and communication 


TRY A READING WITH THE CHARIOT: MOVING ON 

Take the Chariot from your deck and lay the card in the center of the spread, as 
shown. Now shuffle the remaining cards and cut the deck or fan out the cards 
facedown. Choose seven cards with your left hand and place them around the 
Chariot, as shown. You could ask, “What do I need to take me forward?” or 
“What can I experience on this new path?” 


& Card 1: Present situation 
















viv Card 2: Past influences 
& Card 3: What supports you—the environment 
& Card 4: Qualities you need 
& Card 5: Positive aspects—what is known 
& Card 6: Shadow aspects—what is hidden 
Card 7: Outcome 


CARD 3 


CARD 4 



CARD 2 


CARD 1 






















Alternative Names: Fortitude, Force 

Number: VIII (can also be numbered XI in some decks) 

Numerology Link: XVII, The Star 
Astrological Sign or Planet: Leo the Lion 
Element: Fire 
Hebrew Letter: Teth 
Symbol: The serpent 
Meaning: Courage 

Tree of Life Pathway: Ninth, between Geburah and Chesed 
Chakra: Solar plexus, for self-empowerment 
Key Meanings: Patience, tension, and strength 













izm; 



STRENGTH. 


• 1990 U S OwriM 















UNDERSTANDING STRENGTH 


This card shows strength in action: A woman in white stands calmly over a lion, 
holding its jaws open midway. She stays in control by holding her position, 
symbolized by the infinity symbol above her head. The lion signifies passion and 
base instincts, and the woman, civility. Although her position is precarious, she 
does not show fear. She communicates with the lion through her calm presence; 
she is not denying his power. In this way, one of the card’s messages is having 
the courage to listen to and accept our shadow voices, our own emotional 
turmoil, without the fear that it will eat us up. Yet Strength personified does 
more than hold on: She transmutes the beast’s fierce energy to a higher purpose. 
As one of the four cardinal virtue cards of the major arcana sequence (see page 
75), Strength implies a moral victory. 

As a mediator of opposite qualities, Strength is not dissimilar to card II, The 
High Priestess, who stands between earth and the spirit world; V, The 
Hierophant, who intercedes between heaven and earth; and VII, The Chariot, 
who precedes her in the major arcana sequence, in which the charioteer reins in 
the light and dark aspects of the self. Although apparent rivals, these opposites 
derive from one source and, like the yin-yang symbol, are in essence each other. 
Armed with Strength’s experience, card IX, The Hermit, is bold enough to go 
into the wilderness alone to find himself intellectually, emotionally, and 
spiritually. 

Strength’s number, VIII, stands for stability and renewal and was first 
assigned to the card by the Golden Dawn card correspondences. In earlier tarots, 
she was numbered XI, or the digits 11, for duality, and so links to II, The High 
Priestess. Strength as VIII is numerologically linked with card XVII, The Star 
(17, as 1 + 7 = 8). This too is a card of hope and high intention. 


STRENGTH’S ASTROLOGY 

Strength’s zodiac sign is Leo the Lion (July 24-August 23), a natural alignment 
as the lion is shown on the card. The card’s element is dynamic Fire, linked with 
energy and enterprise. 


STRENGTH AND KABBALA 

Strength’s kabbalistic letter is Teth, meaning courage, as well as serpent or 


snake, referencing the wisdom of experience. The astrological glyph for 
Strength’s sign of Leo resembles a snake. On the Tree of Life, Strength is placed 
on the ninth pathway between the spheres of Geburah and Chesed, meaning 
power linked with universal love and order. In Strength, we maintain order, 
despite the potential for chaos. 


UPRIGHT MEANING 

Strength shows that you turn to your higher self for self-guidance; she also 
demonstrates strength of character when dealing with pressure. Courage, 
determination, and patience are needed now, as it is time to get a situation—or 
individual—under control. You will need to act with grace and sensitivity, 
however, rather than using brute force. This is a good card for leadership, as it 
signifies you are ready to take on a challenge and stand firm; others may resist, 
but be consistent in your actions and results will come. In creative projects, 
Strength shows you taking a raw idea and developing it. You refine it without 
sacrificing its spirit or depleting your energy. This concept may take physical 
form as a document, piece of artwork, or prototype. 

On a psychological level, Strength shows the integration of masculine and 
feminine traits and finding balance between the two. In terms of health, Strength 
shows resilience and vitality, recovery from illness, and the willpower to break 
bad habits. 

Here are some specifics: 

& Home: There’s a need to support and direct those with strong opinions. You 
may need to take the role of mediator. 

& Relationships: The need for balance—there is a danger that physical 
attraction masks emotional or other commitment issues that need to be 
addressed. This card is also a message of hope if your relationship has been 
tested, as the situation will soon improve. 

& Career and money: Tension at work—Resolution comes gently and without 
force. 


REVERSED MEANING 

When reversed, Strength turns to weakness of will and avoidance of risk, 


conflicts, and decision-making. This can refer to you ignoring your instincts 
altogether or allowing fear of conflict to stop you from taking action. This 
avoidance is holding back your personal growth; in this situation, you can only 
learn through experience. Whatever you resist persists, so take charge and take 
on the challenge. 

Strength reversed is an obvious message about weakness, so be aware that 
indolence and overthinking can be more exhausting than confrontation. 


HER WISDOM MESSAGE 

With strength, you can discover your higher purpose. 


STRENGTH’S SYMBOLS 

In the Rider-Waite tarot, Strength appears with these magical symbols. Some of 

them reappear in other cards, so learn to recognize them and you’ll soon find 

you can apply your knowledge throughout the deck. 

& The lemniscate, or infinity symbol: Balance, activity, and renewal—The flow 
of this never-ending symbol also suggests consistency and patience. The 
eight-shape mirrors VIII, Strength’s number. 

See this symbol on card I, The Magician. 

& The lion: The lion is a universal symbol of power, courage, majesty, and 
leadership. In alchemy, the lion stands for base matters that can be turned into 
gold, as well as enlightenment. 

See this symbol on card X, The Wheel of Fortune, and XXI, The World. 

& The garland of roses/rose briar: Civility, celebration, and protection 

See this symbol on cards I, The Magician; the Queen of Pentacles; and the 
Four of Wands. 

& The white robe: A symbol of purity 

See this symbol on cards II, The High Priestess, and XIII, Death. 

& Yellow background: Consciousness, clear sight and support—applying 
strength, being courageous, is a conscious action 

See this symbol on cards I, The Magician; III, The Empress; VII, The 
Chariot; and XI, Justice. 


HISTORICAL STRENGTH: THE LION- 
KILLERS 

The image of woman or man and a lion is embedded in many of 
humanity’s myths and legends. Some are stories of healing, such as the 
fairytale beauty and the beast. Another example is the classical fable of 
Androcles, a fugitive slave who heals the paw of a wounded lion. 
Androcles is later recaptured and condemned to public death by mauling 
by a lion. Yet the lion Androcles faces in the stadium is his old friend, who 
recognizes Androcles and refuses to kill him. The slave is given his 
freedom by the Emperor of Rome, and man and lion parade the streets 
together in celebration. Flowers are strewn upon them—echoed, perhaps, 
in the rose garlands shown on our Rider-Waite Strength card. 

In other myths, taking on the lion shows our power over nature. The 
huntress Cyrene, the “girl lionkiller” according to Greek poet Nonnus, 
killed many a beast to protect her father’s cattle; her exploits caught the 
attention of the god Apollo, who fell in love with her. The Visconti-Sforza 
tarots of the Renaissance show Hercules with a raised club, defeating the 
terrifying lion of Nemea. He brought the animal’s skin back to King 
Eurystheus, and with this trophy proved he had succeeded in his first labor. 

The Griggoneur tarot cards of the mid-fifteenth century include an 
unusual Strength card: a courtly lady sitting comfortably holding a broken 
pillar. It’s unclear if she is supporting the two pieces, stopping them from 
falling, or actually breaking the pillar. This image may relate to Samson’s 
destruction of the temple of the Philistines or the legend of the Pillars of 
Hercules, which, according to Plato, guarded the entry to the mysterious 
lost world of Atlantis. This was the border of civilization, so this lady and 
her pillar may symbolize the defense of boundaries. She is literally a pillar 
of strength. 

In the Tarot of Marseilles (1701-1715), we see a woman restraining the 
lion’s jaws and wearing a wide floppy hat—the brim makes the shape of 
the leminscate, or infinity symbol, shown also on the Rider-Waite card (see 
Strength’s Symbols). 

















STRENGTH’S REFLECTIONS 

We can see aspects of Strength in these minor arcana cards: 


& The Seven of Wands, for endurance 
& The Nine of Wands, for relentless effort 
& The Ace of Swords, for decisiveness 
$x£ The Eight of Pentacles, for commitment 


TRY A READING WITH STRENGTH: A TEST OF 
COURAGE 

Take Strength from your deck and lay the card before you. Now shuffle the 
remaining cards and cut the deck or fan out the cards facedown. Choose five 
cards with your left hand and place them around Strength, as shown. You could 
ask, “What should I hold on to?” or “What could I let go of?” To hold or release 
—both actions require courage. 

vf? Card 1: The issue 

Card 2: You in this situation 
& Card 3: What to hold on to 
vi? Card 4: What to let go of 
v<i? Card 5: The outcome 














Alternative Names: The Old Man, Time, The Poor Man 

Number: IX 

Numerology Link: XVII, The Moon 
Astrological Sign or Planet: Virgo the Virgin 
Element: Earth 
Hebrew Letter: Yod 
Symbol: The hand 
Meaning: Prudence 

Tree of Life Pathway: Tenth, between Chesed and Tiphareth 
Chakra: Heart seed, for soul remembrance 
Key Meanings: Healing and self-exploration 





















THE HERMIT. 


• 1900 U S Qmm 





















UNDERSTANDING THE HERMIT 


The Hermit is a man all alone, old and bearded, with just his staff and lantern as 
his companions in a snowy wilderness. Inside his lantern is a glowing star, a 
symbol of guidance that lights his way ahead. The Hermit needs privacy, time 
for silence and discretion, so he can think and plan. He may be in the wilderness, 
but this space is essential to him. In this way, the Hermit tells us it is time to go it 
alone, to break with convention and find our soul’s path. 

In the major arcana sequence, the Hermit appears after VIII, Strength, and 
before X, The Wheel of Fortune. Having learned the lessons of Strength, he 
takes time out to contemplate his experiences. The Hermit can be seen as the 
Fool grown, the youth now as an old man, and his arrival marks the near-end of 
the first half of the tarot journey marked by X, The Wheel of Fortune. In the 
second half of the major arcana cycle, the material world fades and the spiritual 
quest beckons. 

The Hermit’s number is IX, or three groups of dynamic three. The Hermit 
needs time to integrate his experience in mind, body, and soul. Nine is also the 
last single-digit number in the major arcana sequence and a pause in activity 
before he aligns with fate, symbolized by the Wheel of Fortune. The Hermit is 
numerologically linked with card XVIII, The Moon (18; 1 + 8 = 9)—a card of 
imagination and self-reflection. 


THE HERMIT’S ASTROLOGY 

The Hermit’s zodiac sign is Virgo the Virgin. It suggests the Hermit has this 
attribute—perhaps he is a chaste monk. The Hermit’s number, IX, gives us the 
ninth month of the year, September, and the sign of Virgo (August 23-September 
22 ). 

THE HERMIT AND KABBALA 

The kabbalistic letter of the Hermit is Yod, which means hand and also prudence. 
Yod is the foundation of all other letters in the Hebrew alphabet, just as the 
Hermit’s retreat helps him establish his priorities. 

On the Tree of Life, the Hermit is placed on the tenth pathway between 
Chesed and Tiphareth, or love and beauty aligned with salvation. 



UPRIGHT MEANING 


There’s an opportunity to take time away from routine to consider your options 
or advance a personal project. This card can show you enjoying solitude, as you 
need space to process your thoughts and feelings. The Hermit can show a 
physical journey, but more commonly he represents a state of mind in which you 
wisely withdraw and keep your own counsel. It can show breaking with tradition 
and finding a unique approach to a challenge. You may appreciate a mentor, and 
when you are ready, as the saying goes, the teacher will appear. Until that time, 
you have yourself to rely upon, and you do have the answers; all you need is the 
mental space to connect with your inner wisdom. If you are under pressure to 
make a decision, the Hermit shows you need more time. 

There is also a healing aspect to the Hermit, and the card can appear in a 
reading to show self-healing and healing others. You may need to guide others 
and show them the way forward. Even if you are not entirely sure you can help, 
you are equipped to do so. 

The Hermit can also indicate the following: 

& Home: Consider all your options carefully and avoid making big decisions at 
present. Prioritize your tasks and focus on planning rather than immediate 
action. 

& Relationships: Take time to invest in your current relationship or to work on 
your relationship with yourself. The card can also show a period of being 
single. 

vfv Career and money: Take a different approach and stand back. You may be 
drawn to research and professional development courses now. A mentor may 
guide you. 


REVERSED MEANING 

When reversed, you may be feeling alone and unsupported. However, this is 
more an attitude than reality, so it’s worth asking yourself if you are avoiding 
help. The card can also show accepting a role—perhaps victim or martyr—that 
you find hard to let go of due to habit or stubbornness. Alternatively, the card 
can show a time when you are cut off from your usual support systems or have 
been unfriended by those you trusted. If this chimes for you, go with the upright 
card meaning and withdraw for a while, relying on your own guidance. 


HIS WISDOM MESSAGE 

Live quietly for a time. 


THE HERMIT’S SYMBOLS 

In the Rider-Waite tarot, the Hermit appears with these magical symbols. Some 

of them reappear in other major arcana cards, so learn to recognize them and 

you’ll soon find you can apply your knowledge throughout the deck. 

& The staff: The staff symbolizes self-support. In some decks, the staff is 
entwined by a snake, making a single spiral to form the Rod of Asclepius, a 
signifier for the Greek deity of healing. 

& The lantern: A sign of the divine light within that illuminates our life path 

& The six-pointed star: The star is a mark of hope and guidance. Its six points 
comprise two triangles—heaven and earth, or man and God, in unity. It is also 
a symbol of Saturn, god of agriculture and time, the Hermit’s ancestor (see 
The Historical Hermit). 

See this symbol on card XVII, The Star, and III, The Empress. 

& The old man: The archetype of wisdom, the old man’s beard, hood, and 
downward gaze symbolize retreat and discretion. 


THE HISTORICAL HERMIT: FATHER TIME 

On the Renaissance Visconti-Sforza tarots, the Hermit is entitled “The Old 
Man.” On these and similar cards of that era, the hermit holds an hourglass 
in the traditional shape of the infinity symbol or lemniscate, illustrating the 
Hermit’s alternate name, Time. By the eighteenth century, however, the 
Hermit’s hourglass had become a lantern—a possible misinterpretation by 
later artists. 

The Hermit is depicted differently in many cards. He is shown in cards 
of the late fifteenth and sixteenth centuries as an old man on crutches. In 
the Tarocchi of Mitelli (c. 1664) he has angel wings, suggesting he is 
facing death. On eighteenth-century minchiate cards, he is on crutches by a 
tomb with an hourglass, pierced by time’s arrow. Beside him is a stag, a 
Christ symbol. And later, by the twentieth century, we see the Hermit’s 
staff entwined with a snake in the shape of the Rod of Ascelpius, a symbol 
of the Greek god of healing. 

There is also evidence that the Hermit was associated with the Roman 
god Saturn (rather than Mercury, ruler of his sign of Virgo). Saturn was an 
aspect of the Titan god Chronos, who ate his own children because he 
believed the prophesy that one of them would overthrow him—a grisly 
way to stop the passage of time. In the Tarocchi of Mantegna (c. 1470), 
card 47 is Saturno, a bearded man with a staff, just like our traditional 
Hermit. 

The Hermit may also embody the tarot’s hidden virtue card of Prudence. 
It seems most likely that Prudence survived in modern decks as Justice 
(see page 79) or possibly the Hanged Man (page 78), but the Hermit may 
have first crept into the tarot in the Prudence card of the Tarocchi of 
Mantegna, a deck of fifty instructional cards that may be Florentine or 
Venetian in origin and date from around 1470. Prudence shows both an old 
bearded man and a young woman with a mirror and a dragon (which may 
have morphed into the snake shown on the Hermit on contemporary 
decks). The virtue of Prudence has survived in the meaning of the Hermit 
in his Hebrew letter, Yod, and in his meaning of discretion and careful 
planning. 
















THE HERMIT’S REFLECTIONS 

We can see aspects of the Hermit in these minor arcana cards: 


& The Seven of Wands, for standing alone and advocating your beliefs 
& The Nine of Wands, for the need for protection 
& The Nine of Pentacles, for independence and resourcefulness 
& The Queen of Swords, for independence 


TRY A READING WITH THE HERMIT: THE HOURGLASS 


Take the Hermit from your deck and lay him before you. Now shuffle the 
remaining cards and cut the deck or fan out the cards facedown. Choose eight 
cards with your left hand and place them around the Hermit as shown. You could 
ask, “What or whom do I need time out from?” or “What can I learn on my 
journey?” 


Card 1: 
vf? Card 2: 
& Card 3: 
& Card 4: 

Card 5: 
& Card 6: 

Card 7: 
& Card 8: 


Past events 

The impact of the past 

Your emotions 

Your ambition 

What holds you back 

What will help you go forward 

Hopes and dreams 

Outcome 


Crt ftU 7 


CARI> 8 




c:abjj s 




card a 



CARD i 


CARD 2 































Alternative Names: Fate, Destiny, The Wheel 

Number: X 

Numerology Links: I, The Magician, and XIX, The Sun 

Astrological Sign or Planet: Jupiter 
Element: Fire 
Hebrew Letter: Kaph 

Symbol: The palms of the hand, or cup 
Meaning: Destiny 

Tree of Life Pathway: Eleventh, between Chesed and Netzach 
Chakra: Soul star, for soul connection 
Key Meanings: Fate, change, intuition 













WHEEL FORTUNE. 


• 1990 U S G*met SiVmi wc 










UNDERSTANDING THE WHEEL OF FORTUNE 


Flanked by three animals and a winged figure, the Wheel appears between the 
clouds in blue sky, symbolizing hope, clarity, and a breakthrough on a spiritual 
path. With The Wheel in motion is destiny at work: Divine law rules. 

In the major arcana sequence, the Wheel of Fortune as card X marks the 
halfway point in our tarot journey. We now turn from the outward-looking phase, 
which focuses on our relationship with the external world, to another phase that 
begins our inner, spiritual journey. We learn the lesson of Justice, are 
transformed by Death, meet the Angel of Temperance, and then encounter the 
Devil and the Tower of destruction. After all this, we ascend to the cosmos with 
the Star, Moon, and Sun, look back on our lives with Judgment, and celebrate 
our achievements with the World before returning to begin all over again with 
card 0, The Fool. 

The Wheel has a numerological link with card I, The Magician (10 reduces to 
1), and card XIX, The Sun, (19; 1+ 9 = 10). Read together, these three cards 
assume the ritual of a spell or cosmic order: We set a singular intention with the 
Magician, align our wishes with the Wheel of Fortune, and enjoy the outcome 
with the Sun. 


THE WHEEL OF FORTUNE’S ASTROLOGY 

The Wheel corresponds to Jupiter, planet of luck, which rules religions and 
ideology, research and exploration. The angel and three animals around the 
wheel, embodied in the sphinx, can also be connected with the four elements and 
the fixed zodiac signs of Aquarius (the angel, element of Air), Taurus (bull, 
Earth), Scorpio (eagle, Water), and Leo (lion, Fire): They are shown on the 
Wheel as the primal elements of life. 


THE WHEEL OF FORTUNE AND KABBALA 

The Hebrew letter of the Wheel is Kaph, which means the palms of the hand and 
also destiny. On early tarot cards, a youth at the top of the Wheel is shown with 
one cupped hand. 

On the Tree of Life, the Wheel is placed on the eleventh pathway between the 
spheres of Chesed, for law and love, and Netzach, for the forces of nature. 



UPRIGHT MEANING 


When the Wheel is upright, anything is possible—and usually positive. Chance 
meetings, unexpected offers, and news arrive in force. If life has been difficult 
recently, the Wheel shows a turn for the better. 

Under this influence, your intuitive powers heighten, and you may find 
yourself tuning in to people from the past—who magically reappear. This is also 
an auspicious card for communication with family and friends who live some 
distance away. Additionally, the Wheel reveals psychic ability, either within you 
or someone close, and a chance to discover all your hidden aspects—both light 
and dark. You can use the Wheel’s positive message wisely now to listen to your 
intuition and also to manifest your wishes, as your energy aligns with your 
guides, angels, and other spirit helpers who help you on your path. Your quest 
for knowledge is heightened now and, while you cannot control the forces of the 
universe, you can certainly come to a better understanding of your role within 
the universe. 

The Wheel also suggests the following: 

& Home: An unexpected change in your living arrangements will happen; it 
will be surprising but beneficial in the long term. 

& Relationships: An ex-partner or love interest comes back, but you will need 
to decide if this time your relationship will succeed. Don’t try to make it 
work; if it is right, love will go smoothly. 

& Career and money: News is coming that will improve your situation. 
However, you will need to prioritize the demands upon youself and quickly 
adapt to new challenges. 


REVERSED MEANING 

When the Wheel is reversed, you may suffer some bad luck, but thankfully this 
marks the end of a run of challenges. In this way, the simple interpretation of the 
reversed Wheel is closure. The benefits of the upright Wheel will come—it will 
just take a little longer to gather momentum and move you forward. On a 
spiritual level, this card can also show a lack of confidence in your intuitive 
messages or a false start when choosing a way to spiritually develop. Vow to 
adapt, begin again, and keep on working toward your goal. 


ITS WISDOM MESSAGE 

Surrender to fate. 


THE WHEEL’S SYMBOLS 

In the Rider-Waite tarot, the Wheel of Fortune appears with these magical 

symbols. Some of them reappear in other major arcana cards, so learn to 

recognize them and you’ll soon find you can apply your knowledge throughout 

the deck. 

& The wheel and its inscription: In ancient Egypt, the wheel was a symbol of 
the sun. The wheel is inscribed with the letters t, a, r, and o, which can be 
arranged as rota, Latin for wheel. The t, a, r, and o can also be arranged as 
Tora, the visible letters on the scroll of the High Priestess. 

See this inscription on card II, The High Priestess. 

& The wheel’s alchemical symbols: The four symbols on the wheel spokes are 
Mercury, at the top, sulfur on the right, water below, and salt to the left. 
Mercury, sulfur, and salt were believed to be the secret ingredients used to 
create the mystical philosopher’s stone. 

& The wheel’s Hebrew letters: These form the tetragrammaton: the four letters 
Y, H,V, H, or Yahweh—the name of God in Judaism. 

& The sphinx: Meaning unity in diversity, the creature is traditionally composed 
of a human face (the angel), the body of a lion, the tail of a bull, and the 
wings of an eagle (the eagle is represented on the sphinx with a sword rather 
than wings). The four beings the sphinx embodies are illustrated around the 
Wheel, which also relate to the four fixed zodiac signs (see The Wheel of 
Fortune’s Astrology). 

See this symbol on card VII, The Chariot. 

& The snake: According to A. E. Waite, the snake is the legendary serpent- 
monster Typhon. He appears on the card with his head downward to show the 
negative aspect of fate. 

See this symbol on card I, The Magician, and VI, The Lovers. 

& The god Anubis: Anubis is the jackal-headed Egyptian god of the afterlife and 
overseer of the rites of mummification. Placed on the lower right-hand side of 
the wheel with his head upright, we sense he travels all the way around the 


wheel, through life, death, and rebirth, echoing his role as protector of the 
dead. 

& The angel and three animals: The angel, the lion, the bull, and the eagle are 
the symbols of the four evangelists, Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John— 
associated with the Four Gospels of the New Testament. They also symbolize 
the four elements and, by association, the four suits of the minor arcana. 

See these symbols on card XXI, The World. 


THE HISTORICAL WHEEL OF FORTUNE: 
THE FOOL AND THE HERMIT 

The Wheel of Fortune was a common motif of fickle fate in medieval 
times. The Carmina Burana, a manuscript of 254 poems dating from the 
eleventh to thirteenth centuries, later set to music by Carl Orff, contains an 
illustration of a wheel almost identical in composition to that shown in the 
very first tarot cards of the Renaissance era. 

On the Visconti-Sforza card’s Wheel of Fortune, a regal youth sits on a 
platform above the wheel. The youth has ass’s ears, like early renditions of 
the Fool (see page 30). A bearded old man—the Hermit—is crouched 
under the Wheel. As with the Carmina Burana ’s wheel, there is annotation 
for each of the four figures around the wheel. Words appear on the 
Visconti-Sforza card that translate as “I shall reign,” “I am reigning,” “I 
have reigned,” and “I am without reign.” 


THE WHEEL OF FORTUNE’S REFLECTIONS 

We can see aspects of the Wheel of Fortune in these minor arcana cards: 

& The Six of Swords, for moving on 
$x£ The Nine of Cups, for a wish come true 


TRY A READING WITH THE WHEEL: THE FOUR 
ELEMENTS OF FORTUNE 

This reading uses just the minor arcana cards to reveal how best to harness your 
potential on four different levels. Take the Wheel from your deck and lay it 
before you. Now take out all the minor arcana cards and arrange them in their 
suits in four piles. Shuffle each pile. Choose the top card from each pile with 
your left hand and place them as shown. You could ask, “What opportunity is 
coming?” 
















& Card 1: What grounds you (Earth) 

& Card 2: What inspires you (Fire) 

& Card 3: Your wish (the angel; Air) 

& Card 4: What will come—the future (Water) 



THE WHEEL 



CARD 1: PENTACLE 



CARD 2: WAND 

























XI JUSTICE 


Alternative Name: Adjustment 

Number: XI (in some decks, numbered VIII and swapped with Strength) 
Numerological Link: II, The High Priestess 
Astrological Sign or Planet: Libra the Scales 
Element: Air 
Hebrew Letter: Lamed 
Symbol: The whip 
Meaning: Fairness 

Tree of Life Pathway: Twelfth, between Tiphareth and Geburah 

Chakra: Earth star, for spiritual grounding 

Key Meanings: Balance, perception, and objectivity 





















JUSTICE . 


* 1900US Ganwt >nc 






































UNDERSTANDING JUSTICE 


Justice is one of the simplest cards to understand at first glance. A female figure 
is seated between two pillars on a ceremonial podium. This is the judge, or the 
virtue Justice personified, holding the traditional symbols of the law—an upright 
sword in her right hand and the scales in her left. Clad in the red robes of office, 
her right foot is forward and her pose is alert, as if she is about to pronounce 
judgment in court. Unlike traditional justice figures, tarot’s Justice is not 
blindfolded. Her vision is clear. 

The card favors those who are deserving (shown by the scales of mercy), but 
seeks retribution for past wrongs (symbolized by the sword of retribution). 
Justice is delivered through logical procedures and is focused on the mind rather 
than the emotions—just like the suit of Swords in the minor arcana (see page 
176). However, there is, perhaps, more to Justice than meets the eye. Although 
Justice wears red, symbolizing the material world she lives in, the card’s 
background is yellow, for enlightenment, suggesting the guidance of a higher, 
divine power. The card design, with a central figure between two pillars, is 
intentionally similar to those of V, The Hierophant, and II, The High Priestess, 
suggesting duality and knowledge. 

Justice is one of the four cardinal, or essential, virtue cards of the tarot. The 
others are Strength, Temperance, and Prudence. The original Prudence card of 
early tarots has disappeared, but its meaning may be preserved in Justice. An old 
interpretation of prudence is wisdom, rather than caution—for example, in the 
conjunct word jurisprudence, the theory and study of law. 

The number of Justice is XI. If XI is expressed as 11, we have two numbers 
with the same value, symbolizing balance and fairness. II is also the number of 
the High Priestess, Justice’s numerological partner. 

In traditional decks of the nineteenth century and earlier, Justice usually 
swapped places with Strength, number VIII. The VIII also suggests balance, as it 
comprises two sets of four, which is the number of stability. 


JUSTICE’S ASTROLOGY 

Justice takes the sign of Libra the Scales (September 22-October 23), which 
begins at the autumn equinox when the hours of daylight and darkness are equal, 
reflected in Libra’s symbol, the scales. Justice’s element, Air, also reminds us of 
the scales, which hang midair. 


JUSTICE AND KABBALA 


Lamed is the twelfth letter of the Hebrew alphabet and falls halfway within the 
sequence of twenty-two letters. Lamed means to whip or to goad—to assert 
authority; its esoteric meaning is fairness. 

On the Tree of Life, Justice is placed on the thirtieth pathway between the 
spheres of Tiphareth, for beauty and consciousness, and Geburah, or power. In 
this way, the card’s kabbalistic association suggests power, perfectly wielded. 


UPRIGHT MEANING 

There will be a positive outcome. This is a time when past errors or imbalances 
can be redressed. You benefit from a fair system, provided you are accountable, 
honest, and deserving. Equally, you may be the judge in your own life, using 
your perspective and integrity to make good decisions that will safeguard your 
future. You may take a moral stand on an issue that affects you and those around 
you. In legal matters, a decision is made or a ruling given, which goes in your 
favor; justice will be done and order restored. On a spiritual level, Justice shows 
the working out of karma, or actions and consequences. 

Justice shows a logical, considered influence. It is a welcome arrival in your 
reading if life has felt chaotic. It is a card of empowerment, advising you to take 
a left-brain approach to take control. Influential people favor you now, and your 
projects get support. Listen to advice from people around you whom you respect 
Justice can also indicate the following: 

& Home: Legal issues concerning property are resolved. Contracts are signed 
and you can make progress. 

& Relationships: While balance and practical issues are important now, take 
care that your emotional needs are met. Lind the right balance between work 
and relationships. 

vfO Career and money: At work you may be tested, but the outcome is positive; 
job interviews and negotiations are successful. Linancially, you are coming to 
the end of a frugal period—money matters are set to improve. 


REVERSED MEANING 


Life goes out of balance as work, relationships, and money issues spiral out of 
control. A decision may go against you, so there may be dishonesty or a 
miscarriage of justice. You are treated unfairly, which is compounded by bad 
advice from a trusted individual. You are not able to speak your truth and feel 
overruled by those who don’t understand your predicament. It is important to 
find your voice and stay strong to your values—if you are in the right. 


HER WISDOM MESSAGE 

With the right values, reward comes. 


JUSTICE’S SYMBOLS 

In the Rider-Waite tarot, Justice appears with these magical symbols. Some of 

them reappear in other major arcana cards, so learn to recognize them and you’ll 

soon find you can apply your knowledge throughout the deck. 

& The stone pillars: Boundaries and permanence—Justice’s ruling is given 
within the boundaries of the law. 

See this symbol on card II, The High Priestess; V, The Hierophant; and 
VII, The Chariot. 

& The sword: The sword shows the action that results from judgment. Like the 
Ace of Swords, it is held upright (see page 176) and signifies success. 

See this symbol on the Suit of Swords; X, The Wheel of Fortune; and I, 
The Magician. 

& The scales: The scales represent the thought process involved in making a 
judgment—in that both sides of a story must be weighed up. The weight in 
the center of the scales resembles a ring through a sword, an ancient Celtic 
symbol of justice. 

& The crown: An authority symbol, Justice’s crown is known as a mural crown. 
Crenelated like castle walls, it suggests that justice is part of a civilized 
society. The square jewel in its center represents order. 

& The veil: This appears to be a darkish red on the Rider-Waite card and is often 
shown as violet in later Rider interpretations. Some say this violet symbolizes 
spirituality, but consider it first as a soft boundary between the judge’s court 


and the everyday world—when a ruling has been given, the veil is dropped 
and words become action. 

See this symbol on card II, The High Priestess, as a sign of the spirit 
world beyond her chamber. 

& Yellow background: Consciousness, clear sight, and support 

See this symbol on I, The Magician; III, The Empress; VII, The Chariot; 
and VIII, Strength. 


HISTORICAL JUSTICE: THE WISDOM OF 
ASTREA AND MA’AT 

The figure of justice so familiar to the courthouse derives from the ancient 
Greek goddess Astrea (the Roman Justitia), daughter of Themis. Both 
Astea and Themis were personifications of justice in the classical world. In 
statues depicting them, they raise the scales of justice and point the sword 
downward, and the goddesses were usually shown without blindfolds. 

Historically, there are few variations on the card design. The Visconti- 
Sforza Justice cards, painted in fifteenth- and sixteenth-century Italy, show 
the likely figure of Maria Bianca Visconti (see page 40) with her scales and 
upright sword. However, a knight in black armor on a white charger is 
jumping over the throne, perhaps implying the result—or action—of her 
ruling; there may be a resonance with the horseman in the Death card (see 
page 82). In the Classic Tarot, a reproduction of a Milanese tarot from 
around 1835, Justice has wings, echoing Ma’at, the ancient Egyptian 
goddess of cosmic wisdom and one of the earliest winged figures we have 
evidence of in art. Ma’at’s influence is also suggested in card XX, 
Judgment. As Ma’at weighed the souls of the dead, in Judgment we 
evaluate our own soul (see page 110). 


JUSTICE’S REFLECTIONS 

We can see aspects of Justice in these minor arcana cards: 

& The Ace of Swords, for clarity of thought and success 

& The Two of Swords, which shows two swords, means a stalemate; a pending 
decision 


TRY A READING WITH JUSTICE: THE BALANCE OF 
POWER 
















Take Justice from your deck and lay the card before you. Now shuffle the 
remaining cards and cut the deck or fan out the cards facedown. Choose four 
cards with your left hand and place them around Justice, as shown. You could 
ask, “How do I make this decision?” or, as a prediction, “Will a decision go in 
my favor?” 

& Card 1: Present situation 

& Card 3: The sword: What action to take/what events will occur 
& Card 2: The scales: What needs to be weighed up 
& Card 4: The outcome 


CARD 2 




CARD 1 




CARD 3 



CARD 4 











Alternative Name: The Traitor 
Number: XII 

Numerology Link: III, The Empress 
Astrological Sign or Planet: Neptune 
Element: Water 
Hebrew Letter: Mem 

Symbol: Water and the oceans 
Meaning: Transition 

Tree of Life Pathway: Thirteenth, between Hod and Geburah 

Chakra: Third eye, for intuition 

Key Meanings: Waiting, sacrifice, and enlightenment 

















THE HANGED MAN. 


• 1990 U S OtmM 











UNDERSTANDING THE HANGED MAN 


This card, with its strange image of a man suspended from a tree, seems deadly 
by name. Yet when we examine the man’s face, he appears perfectly calm— 
content, even, regardless of his precarious situation. He hangs by one leg yet his 
expression is beatific, and he has been given a halo. What exactly is going on? 

The Hanged Man is on a tree rather than a hangman’s scaffold, and the tree is 
the Tree of Life, symbol of the world at an esoteric level. This tree is in bud and 
alive with future possibility. The Hanged Man also appears safely tethered, and 
it’s as if he knows he cannot fall. Suspended in midair, he is content to wait out 
his fate. 

The Hanged Man has numerous possible identities (see The Historical 
Hanged Man); he may even be Christ himself—we have a halo and a kind of 
cross, after all. In the Paris Eadwine Psalter, which dates from the twelfth 
century, Christ is shown upside down on a cross, attended to by angels and two 
men binding his wrists. This may relate one of the card’s meanings, which is 
sacrifice. The T-shaped cross is also a symbol of salvation and indicated those 
who suffered through the crucifixion of Christ. It is natural to connect at first 
with the otherworldly situation of the Hanged Man in his happy suspension, 
rather than his identity. The Hanged Man is not about to die. Rather, he is 
hanging around until his circumstances change. 

In the major arcana sequence, the Hanged Man falls after XI, Justice, and 
before XIII, Death. We had our values on trial in Justice, and now we must hold 
on until Death, when we can figuratively let go. Death brings transformation, 
while the Hanged Man prepares to make the sacrifice Death needs so he can 
move on. This may sound rather grim, but Death is ongoing change and 
transformation, and any big shift requires preparation—and in some cases, the 
waiting time that the Hanged Man represents. 

The Hanged Man’s number, XII, comprises 1 and 2, adding up to III for the 
Empress. Both cards are about incubation: The Hanged Man’s waiting is a 
spiritual incubation, relating to the legend of Odin (see The Hanged Man’s 
Symbols), whereas the Empress’s equivalent is the gestation time for her babies 
(see III, The Empress, page 42). 


THE HANGED MAN’S ASTROLOGY 

Neptune is the planet of the Hanged Man. Ruler of the oceans, Neptune links 


with the element of the card, Water. Also associated with mystical states and the 
imagination, Neptune indicates the different facets of the card when reversed— 
the aspect of fantasy and the raised state of consciousness that a period of 
reflection can bring. 


THE HANGED MAN AND KABBALA 

The Hebrew letter of the Hanged Man is Mem, which means the oceans as well 
as transition. On the Tree of Life, the Hanged Man is placed on the thirteenth 
pathway between the spheres of Hod and Geburah, or the logical mind versus 
power. Hod is also concerned with creativity and insight while Geburah has a 
violent, destructive aspect. The hanged man is suspended between these two 
energies, and perhaps he must use his clever mind to balance his frustration as he 
exists in limbo. 


UPRIGHT MEANING 

The obvious meaning of the card at first glance is hanging around: Events are 
not moving with speed, but all you can do is wait patiently in the knowledge that 
the universe has its own plan. The card can also indicate that you may have 
made sacrifices just now and are eager to see rewards. Unfortunately, you cannot 
force an outcome that fits with your timetable. There are many other factors 
about which you can have no knowledge or influence. Therefore, you may also 
expect delays to travel plans and projects. 

On a creative level, this card can appear frequently when a person is feeling 
frustrated with their progress. However, the message of the Hanged Man is 
incubation—your project needs time to evolve. Use this time to develop 
perspective on your work and your ambitions. 

Another message from the Hanged Man is to try to see things from a new 
angle. If your approach isn’t working, ask yourself if you can think laterally or 
find a way to turn a situation around. 

The Hanged Man can also suggest the following: 

& Home: Waiting and delays may affect remodeling or house moves. Try to 
invest your time wisely while you wait—there may be a creative solution. 

& Relationships: You are unable to get the commitment you need from a 


partner, or you may be the one unwilling to commit. Traditionally, it can also 
show hanging around for a lover to acknowledge you as a partner rather than 
friend. If you’re waiting too long, you may decide it’s not worth the 
emotional investment. 

& Career and money: Hold back on signing contracts or dealing with legal 
matters just now. With work, decisions may be going on that will affect your 
position, but you are protected. If you are looking for work, there may be 
delays and frustration. 


REVERSED MEANING 

The Hanged Man reversed can be a sign of rigid thinking and martyrdom. You 
may need to revise your expectations; what you think you want may not be 
possible. In the position, the card asks you if you are hanging on to a fantasy that 
may make you a victim rather than a victor. Take another view and liberate 
yourself from a contract or other obligation that cannot offer you what you want. 


HIS WISDOM MESSAGE 

Use your time wisely. 


THE HANGED MAN’S SYMBOLS 

In the Rider-Waite tarot, the Hanged Man appears with these magical symbols. 

Some of them reappear in other major arcana cards, so learn to recognize them 

and you’ll soon find you can apply your knowledge throughout the deck. 

& The Tree: This represents the World Tree that the Norse god Odin hung from 
and the Tree of Life, central motif of the Kabbala, the Judaic mystical belief 
system. 

& The Tree as the Tau Cross: Tau is the last letter of the Hebrew alphabet and 
refers to the shape of a cross, a T-shape, upon which Christ was crucified. 

& The figure: According to A. E. Waite, the figure’s right bent leg suggests part 
of the shape of the fylfot cross, an early Christian symbol. 

& The halo: A symbol of enlightenment and a spiritual signifier, around the 


Hanged Man, the halo is also a symbol of protection. 

See this symbol on card XIV, Temperance, crowning Archangel Michael. 



THE HISTORICAL HANGED MAN: SOLDIER 
OF FORTUNE 

The historical Hanged Man may be Muzio Attendolo Sforza, an Italian 
condottiere or mercenary connected with the Visconti family, who 
commissioned the early tarot decks (see page 10). Attendolo killed the 
tyrant Ottobuono Terzo, an opponent of the Pope, but claimed that Pope 
John had not paid him for his services, so he defected to fight for King 
Ladislaus of Naples. According to scholar Geoffrey Trease, the Pope was 
so incensed by Attendolo’s turnabout that he commissioned a satirical 
illustration showing him as a traitorous hanged man, which the tarot 
illustration references. 

Another possible inspiration for the Hanged Man is the Norse God 
Odin, who hung from the World Ash tree for nine days and nights and at 
the end of his ordeal was granted the gift of prophecy. The eighteenth- 
century occultist Court de Gebelin suggested that the Hanged Man may 
actually be a printer’s error, and that the card was intended to be the other 
way up. Upright, it resembles a French tarot of around 1720 with a 
Prudence card showing the Hanged Man’s pose, upright with one knee 
bent. However, given the earliest Hanged Man cards were hand-painted, 
it’s more likely that the figure is correctly positioned—and that the original 
Hanged Man was actually Muzio Attendolo Sforza. 


THE HANGED MAN’S REFLECTIONS 

We can see aspects of the Hanged Man in these minor arcana cards: 

& The Eight of Wands reversed, for delay with moving and communication 
& The Two of Wands reversed, for delays to plans 
The Three of Wands reversed, for delays to travel 


TRY A READING WITH THE HANGED MAN: AN 
















ALTERED PERSPECTIVE 


Take the Hanged Man from your deck and lay him before you. Now shuffle the 
remaining cards and cut the deck or fan out the cards facedown. Choose five 
cards with your left hand and place them as shown. You could ask, “What am I 
waiting for?” or “What supports me at this time?” 

v':> Card 1: Your situation 
& Card 2: What supports you emotionally 
Card 3: What supports you practically 
& Card 4: An alternative view of the situation 
& Card 5: Outcome 


CARD S 













XIII DEATH 


Alternative Names: Mortality, Transformation, Thirteen; sometimes unnamed 

Number: XIII 

Numerology Link: IV, The Emperor 
Astrological Sign or Planet: Scorpio the Scorpion 
Element: Water 
Hebrew Letter: Nun 
Symbol: The fish 
Meaning: Decline and rebirth 

Tree of Life Pathway: Fourteenth, between Netzach and Tiphareth 
Chakra: Alta Major, for the past and past lives 
Key Meanings: Transformation and change 

















DEATH. 


• 1990 U S OamM 





















UNDERSTANDING DEATH 


Death’s image is unmistakable. Unlike the Hanged Man—a common motif in the 
fifteenth century but a puzzle to us today—Death’s grim reaper is eternally 
understood as an immutable part of our earthly existence. Triumphant with his 
scythe and hood, sometimes riding a horse, skeletal Death is a reminder of our 
human frailty. Yet Death is also the bringer of necessary change and is not a sign 
of the physical death of a person in the present or future. He heralds the end of 
an era, when what is not needed is taken so the next phase can begin. Without 
him, we could have no clear sight of what might be possible. 

Death as the reaper brings in the harvest, which is shown by the five ears of 
corn on his standard, or flag. Whatever is worth having will be saved, but what is 
irrelevant will be taken. On the Rider-Waite card, Death’s influence affects all 
people regardless of status, shown by the people on the card at various stages of 
death or surrender, from the bishop to the child, the king to the maiden. This is 
the medieval Dance of Death, a common subject in paintings of that era. His 
black armor and pale horse follow the description of Death, one of the four 
horsemen of the apocalypse described in the New Testament’s Book of 
Revelation. 

In the major arcana sequence, Death arrives after card XII, The Hanged Man, 
a logical progression in that death must be the consequence of hanging, but this 
is spiritual death and rebirth after a time of contemplation. The card that follows 
Death is Temperance, when we begin to assimilate our past, present, and future 
to come to a greater understanding of our potential. 

Death’s number, XIII, is traditionally unlucky, but in numerology it reduces to 
4 (1 + 3 = 4)—or IV, The Emperor, which promises that a new order will come 
after Death has cleared the way. A sun silhouettes the city: This is both sunset 
and sunrise, or simultaneous endings and beginnings. 


DEATH’S ASTROLOGY 

Scorpio is named after the scorpion, which kills with a swift sting—and, 
unsurprisingly, it is the astrological sign associated with Death. Its dates 
(October 23-November 22) mark the period after the harvest when leaves fall 
and we stock up for the winter. Scorpio is associated with death and sex, dying 
and creation, just as Death brings an ending before fertile new life with the 
spring. 



DEATH AND KABBALA 


The Hebrew letter associated with Death is Nun, which means fish, a symbol of 
sexuality and sperm; in climax this is le petit mort, the Little Death, which leads 
us to Nun’s connotations of decline and rebirth. 

On the Tree of Life, Death is placed on the fourteenth pathway, between the 
spheres of Netzach and Tiphareth, or the cycles of nature—rebirth and growth. 


UPRIGHT MEANING 

Death brings endings and beginnings—sometimes all at once. This a time of fast 
and deep transformation and an opportunity to let go of whatever you no longer 
need. Unlike card XX, Judgment, which signals a process of self-examination, 
Death’s impact is sudden and may be shocking. You have little control over 
external events when Death looms, but in time you will be able to see this sharp 
change in circumstances as a blessing. A break with the past—from relationships 
and friendships to work that is no longer satisfying—is the only way forward. In 
this sense, Death can be a release and a relief. Death, after all, is the ultimate 
reality check, and he leaves you with the bare bones, the truth. 

In certain areas of life, Death can signify the following: 

& Home: You need to find a new home; the place you are living no longer 
meets your needs. New circumstances may offer an opportunity to relocate. 

& Relationships: A relationship ends or there is a period of necessary 

separation. In friendships, there will be an opportunity to reconnect when the 
time is right. 

& Career and money: Signifying a career change or the ending of business 
partnerships or ways of bringing in an income, Death also suggests new 
opportunities are on the horizon. Financially, this is a tough time, but money 
matters will improve, so hold tight. 


REVERSED MEANING 

Death reversed has virtually the same meaning as the card in the upright 
position, but the difference is in your reaction. You may feel anxious and 
stressed, unable to comprehend what is happening, rather than being accepting. 


When Death is reversed, the universe is telling you that there is no way back—a 
relationship cannot be mended, or an employer won’t change their mind. If you 
do a second reading and ask the question again, this card can appear after you 
have already had Death upright, as a final confirmation of your question. 


ITS WISDOM MESSAGE 

Swift change brings new beginnings. 


DEATH’S SYMBOLS 

In the Rider-Waite tarot, Death appears with these magical symbols. Some of 

them reappear in other major arcana cards, so learn to recognize them and you’ll 

soon find you can apply your knowledge throughout the deck. 

& The standard: The standard, or flag, shows a white rose and five ears of corn. 
The rose symbolizes renewal and the corn, the harvest. Death takes his 
harvest of souls and leaves the grain—the truth of his decision. 

See the flag of St. George on card XX, Judgment. 

& The black armor: Black symbolizes loss and endings. Death is protected by 
his armor, whereas his chosen ones have no protection from his scythe. 

& The pale horse: The pale horse of Death, one of the four horsemen of the 
apocalypse, links the Death card with Judgment: The four horsemen bring an 
apocalypse upon the world before the Last Judgment. 

& The red feather: Symbolizing the life force, here it is shown wilted and dying. 

See this symbol as a positive on cards 0, The Fool, and XIX, The Sun. 

& The bishop and child: The innocent child and godly bishop are both shown in 
yellow to symbolize their piety. They look directly at the figure of Death, 
their purity protecting them from fear, while the other victims turn away. 

& The city gates: Death’s rampage takes place outside the city walls because, 
traditionally, burial grounds were established away from cities for hygiene 
reasons. On the card, the city gates represent the gates of heaven. The sun 
rising and/or setting shows the dawn of a new era and the closing of a present 
era. 

See this symbol on card XVIII, The Moon. 


& The ship: The boat or ship is a signifier in many ancient beliefs for the 
journey the soul takes to the afterlife. The riverbed is marshlike and suggests 
the Styx, the mythological Greek river over which the souls of the dead were 
carried to the underworld; this also links to Death’s element of Water. In 
Christianity, the boat is an old symbol for Christ and the church. 


HISTORICAL DEATH: DANSE MACABRE 

The Visconti di Modrone tarot (1441-1447) shows Death on horseback 
with a bandage around his head, wielding a huge scythe—very like our 
Rider-Waite card, as it too shows a bishop or king and children, all about to 
succumb. In the Visconti-Sforza tarots, Death is a skeletal archer who 
holds a vertebra in the shape of an archer’s bow. The clear message is that 
death, just like love, strikes at random. 

The Black Death, famine, and the Hundred Years War in Europe in the 
thirteenth and fourteenth centuries made death a very common part of life 
in medieval times, and paintings showing Death were a common reminder 
of our frailty: Painter and printmaker Pieter Bruegel the Elder’s 1562 The 
Triumph of Death depicts a Dance of Death, or Danse Macabre, showing 
Death as an animated skeleton slaying people from all walks of life, again, 
like the randomness shown in the Rider-Waite card. Later, Death’s dance 
became a subject for satire, and Death became an almost comic figure, 
leading unwilling and random citizens to their demise. 


DEATH’S REFLECTIONS 

We can see aspects of the Death card in these minor arcana cards: 

& The Ten of Swords, for endings 
& The Four Aces, for beginnings 


TRY A READING WITH DEATH: LOOKING AT 
TRANSFORMATION 

If you are uncomfortable with the Death card, focus on the meaning of transition 
and change—and get comfortable with the image. Take Death from your deck 
and lay him before you. Now shuffle the remaining cards, and cut the deck or fan 
out the cards facedown. Choose two cards with your left hand and place them as 
















shown. You could ask, “What needs to go?” or “What will be transformed?” 


& Card 1: Past issues: what is to be released 
& Card 2: The outcome 



CARD 1 


CARD 2 













XIV TEMPERANCE 


Alternative Name: Art 
Number: XIV 

Numerology Link: V, The Hierophant 
Astrological Sign or Planet: Sagittarius the Archer 
Element: Fire 
Hebrew Letter: Samekh 

Symbol: Support or crutch 
Meaning: Patience 

Tree of Life Pathway: Fifteenth, between Yesod and Tiphareth 
Chakra: Solar plexus, for personal power 

Key Meanings: Moderation, reconciliation, healing, and angelic guidance 




















xm 



TEMPERANCE. 


• 1990 U S G*m*» Si 


































UNDERSTANDING TEMPERANCE 


An angel holds two cups flowing with water. He has one foot on a rock and the 
other in the pool of water, showing the present, conscious mind (the rock, or 
earth), and the past, emotions and the unconscious mind (water). A clear path 
mns from the pool through two mountains and toward a potential future: a 
luminous rising sun. A new horizon or perspective is in sight. The riverbank is 
lush and verdant, and two yellow irises bloom there, symbols of hope. The 
angel, by moderating the flow of water in his cups, creates a harmonious flow, a 
new reality. 

In the major arcana sequence, the angel of Temperance sits between card 
XIII, Death, and XV, The Devil; it is the antithesis of Death’s loss and the 
Devil’s enslavement to materialism and base urges. The angel is Archangel 
Michael, the protector warrior-angel, who offers us spiritual help and guidance 
while we strive to pacify or temper volatile forces. If we look closely, we see that 
the water from Michael’s cups could be running upward or downward. Alchemy 
is at work, suggesting that a little magic may be needed if we are to reconcile all 
the demands upon us. 

Temperance is one of the tarot’s four virtues. Numerically between VI, The 
Lovers, and XX, Judgment, Temperance is also the second angel card in the 
major arcana sequence; it’s a call to spiritual connection and service. This is 
shown by the symbol of the sun on Archangel Michael’s forehead and the amulet 
on his chest (see Temperance’s Symbols). Angels in the tarot are also connected 
with time. With Temperance, we are dealing with issues of the past, present, and 
future. With the Lovers, Archangel Raphael calls time on a present decision with 
future impact; with Judgment, Archangel Gabriel calls time on the past. 

Temperance’s number is XIV, the double of prime number 7, the magical 
number of creation. In numerology, the sum of XIV (14; 1+4 =5) gives 5, or V, 
The Hierophant. The Hierophant’s and Temperance’s Archangel Michael is a 
divine meditator. 


TEMPERANCE’S ASTROLOGY 

Sagittarius the Archer (November 23-December 21) is Temperance’s sign. The 
archer is sometimes known as the centaur—half-man, half-beast—showing the 
blending of opposites. The glyph for Sagittarius is the crossed arrow, like that of 
the archer. It is a symbol of precision, just as Archangel Michael pours the water 



between goblets at a precise angle so no liquid is spilled. Temperance’s element 
is Fire, for action and energy. 


TEMPERANCE AND KABBALA 

The Hebrew letter associated with Temperance is Samekh, meaning support and 
patience. Temperance is placed on the Tree of Life on the fifteenth pathway, 
between the spheres of Yesod and Tiphareth, linking together the qualities of 
change and salvation. 


UPRIGHT MEANING 

Temperance shows you dealing with a potentially volatile situation, and you 
need to temper your thoughts and actions to find balance and harmony. This 
means choosing neither one nor the other, but blending two opposing forces to 
create an inspired solution. The card also asks you not to resist, but to accept 
both sides of a situation and be guided by what feels most natural to you. It is 
time to reconcile any area of your life that is out of kilter. Be hands-on; you can 
analyze what you might do for eons, but what matters now is action. 

Temperance also shows you are connecting with your guides and angels. You 
may be given a sign, such as advice from a friend or even a stranger whom the 
angels have sent to help you. This may also be the beginning of a spiritual 
journey for you. In your projects, what you imagine you can create. You may 
also be inspired by an invention or work of art from the past. 

Here are some other interpretations: 

& Home: Running a household and dealing with demanding children or 
partners is a fine balancing act, but you have the financial and emotional 
resources to succeed. 

& Relationships: This is a stage in a relationship when you can reach a new 
level of trust. If you are single, you may be guided toward a new partner; it’s 
an emotionally intense time. 

vfv Career and money: You may be dealing with difficult or highly sensitive 
individuals. Be the diplomat, and you can work a miracle. In money terms, 
pay extra attention to your income and outgoings. 


REVERSED MEANING 


Temperance reversed shows imbalance and unfairness in relationships and 
problems with money; what you pour into your relationships and work isn’t 
rewarded. This card can also show you struggling with change, and the past 
dominating your present and future. In this position, difficult old memories can 
resurface and you feel held back. Try to look at what you need now, in the 
present. 


ITS WISDOM MESSAGE 

You are guided to find peace. 


TEMPERANCE’S SYMBOLS 

In the Rider-Waite tarot, Temperance appears with these magical symbols. Some 

of them reappear in other major arcana cards, so learn to recognize them and 

you’ll soon find you can apply your knowledge throughout the deck. 

& The triangle and square: The triangle within the square denotes the element 
of Fire (the upward-pointing triangle) and the Earth (the square). This, said A. 
E. Waite, is the symbol of the septenary—the seven principles of man 
according to nineteenth-century Theosophists. The seven principles are the 
physical body, the astral body, the breath, desire, thought, the spirit, and “I 
am.” Above this amulet are the four Hebrew letters Y, H, V, and H, the 
tetragrammaton for the Lord or, when spoken, Yahweh. 

& The cups: A cup represents the vessel of our experience. In Temperance, one 
cup is for the past and one is for the present, and the water running between 
the two symbolizes the present—what we create from the past and our future 
expectations. The cups also show focus on the task in hand. 

& The sun symbol: The dotted circle on the archangel’s head is the astrological 
symbol for the sun and spiritual illumination. It is also the alchemical symbol 
for gold. 

See this symbol on card XIX, The Sun; 0, The Fool; and VI, The Lovers; 
as a halo, see card XII, The Hanged Man. 

& Archangel Michael: Archangel Michael is the protector-archangel who deals 


with cutting through fear and letting go of the past. 

See the Archangels Raphael and Gabriel on card VI, The Lovers, and XX, 

Judgment. 

& The irises: The irises refer to Iris, the Greek goddess of rainbows and hope. 

& The water-pool: The water symbolizes purification and regeneration in 
cultural practice and is also a signifier of the flow of emotions and 
unconscious mind. 

See this symbol on card XVII, The Star, and XVIII, The Moon. 

& Rising sun over mountain/volcano: Symbolizing renewal, it’s a new dawn 
after a period of stress, shown by the mountains. 

See the sun rising over the city on card XIII, Death. 


HISTORICAL TEMPERANCE: FINDING 
CHARITY 

Temperance has few variations in its card design throughout history. Early 
tarot cards of the Renaissance show a woman without wings, and after the 
1700s, the woman becomes an angel; the two cups, however, have always 
been present. 

It’s likely that Temperance embodies more than just one virtue. 
Prudence, Faith, Hope, and Charity are the “lost” cards of the tarot, which 
once appeared in variations of the Visconti-Sforza tarots of fifteenth- 
century Italy as well as earlier tarots. It’s likely that Temperance became a 
natural home for Charity, as the Catholic catechism states, “The virtue of 
chastity comes under the cardinal virtue of Temperance, which seeks to 
permeate the passions and appetites of the senses with reason.” 


TEMPERANCE’S REFLECTIONS 

We can see aspects of Temperance in these minor arcana cards: 

& The Two of Coins, for weighing up a decision, or money flow 
& The Six of Cups, for harmony 
& The Page of Cups, for magical thinking 
& The Queen of Cups, for nurturing a situation 
& The Six of Pentacles, for fairness and generosity 


TRY A READING WITH TEMPERANCE: MAKING PEACE 

Take Temperance from your deck and lay the card at the top of the spread as 
shown. Now split the deck into the minor and major arcana and shuffle each pile. 
Choose the first two cards from the minor arcana pile and lay them out as shown, 
then choose cards 3, 4, and 5 from the major arcana pile. You could ask, “What 
do I need to temper?” The suit element of the minor cards will show you which 
















life area needs attention. The majors give you a deeper insight into how the 
situation may be transformed. 

& Card 1: What factors are in balance (minor arcana) 
vfO Card 2: What factors are out of balance (minor arcana) 
vfv Card 3: What guidance do I need? (major arcana) 

& Card 4: Action to take (major arcana) 

& Card 5: The outcome (major arcana) 

TIP: For cards 1 and 2, you can use the general minor arcana suit meanings to 
begin with: 

Swords: work, focus, decisions—the mind 
Wands: projects, inspiration, travel—the soul 
Cups: emotions, relationships—the heart 
Pentacles: money, home, security—the physical body 





HJEROm 


CARD 1 

(minor are ana) 


CARD 3 

(major arcana] 




CARD 2 

(minor arcana) 


CARD 4 

[major arcana) 



CARD 5 

(major arcana) 








































Alternative Names: Pan, Temptation 

Number: XV 

Numerology Link: VI, The Lovers 
Astrological Sign or Planet: Capricorn the Goat 
Element: Earth 
Hebrew Letter: Ayin 
Symbol: Eye 
Meaning: Clear vision 

Tree of Life Pathway: Sixteenth, between Hod and Tiphareth 

Chakra: Base for base instincts 

Key Meanings: Enslavement and temptation 















THE DEVIL . 


Z 


• 'MOU S Garret Si 













UNDERSTANDING THE DEVIL 


A bearded man-beast sits above a door to which two demons, a man and woman, 
are chained. With an inverted pentacle rising from his third eye, he appears to be 
the epitome of evil, complete with horns, clawed feet, and batlike wings. He is 
half-man, half-goat, an archetype with roots in many ancient gods. He may be 
the faun Pan, god of excess; Satan, son of God gone bad; Baphomet, the dark 
idol the Knights Templar were accused of worshipping; or perhaps Cernunnos, 
the horned Pagan deity. All are attributed with great virility and sexual power. 

The goat-god’s abode is black, like a cave. We are in a dark place here, save 
for his fiery torch. His right hand raised asserts his control over the two small 
figures that stand before him. The couple is Adam and Eve, who, banished from 
paradise, find themselves enslaved and cormpted—they are becoming demons, 
shown by the tiny horns growing from their heads. Yet when we look closely, we 
can see that the chains around their necks are not at all tight; if they wished, they 
could walk away from the Devil altogether. The fruit near Eve reminds us of the 
Garden of Eden and the forbidden fruit. Adam’s tail has a devilish fork, showing 
that these two have certainly given in to temptation. 

In the major arcana sequence, the Devil falls between XIV, Temperance, and 
XVI, The Tower. If the lessons of Temperance are not learned, we fall from the 
grace of Temperance’s angel and into the arms of the Devil. When we do finally 
turn our back on him, the lesson is profound. We must find a whole new way of 
living as the Tower—the ego—struck by lightning is destroyed. 

The Devil’s number, XV, reduces to card VI (1 + 5 = 6), or the Lovers. The 
Devil is the shadow side of the Lovers, fallen to materialism, greed, and lust. 

The Devil is also a symbol for other negative behavior patterns, such control, 
dangerous affairs, and addiction. 


THE DEVIL’S ASTROLOGY 

The Devil’s zodiac sign is Capricorn the Goat (December 22-January 20), 
linking with his identities as Pan and Satan. Capricorn’s element is Earth, for 
material needs, and its planet is Saturn. Saturn was the Roman god of time. 
Time, like the Devil himself, is traditionally the ultimate enemy of man (see The 
Historical Devil). 



THE DEVIL AND KABBALA 


The Devil’s kabbalistic letter is Ay in, meaning eye, and also clear vision—a clue 
to be vigilant and all-seeing in the Devil’s presence. On the Tree of Life, the card 
is placed on the sixteenth pathway between the spheres of Hod and Tiphareth. 
Hod stands for the mind and Tiphareth, beauty and rebirth, which shows us how 
our insight into a particular situation may just release us from the Devil’s grip. 


UPRIGHT MEANING 

You may be enslaved to an ideal or a relationship that demands too much. What 
started positively, or even pleasurably, has reversed, and now you are seeing a 
situation for what it is. This is a destructive situation, and you may be feeling 
controlled and under a bad influence. This is a card of greed, temptation, and 
materialism. Yet to change the situation, you will need to think laterally and use 
a little cunning. It’s never worth confronting the problem, as the negativity is 
endemic—hence the Devil card often appears to describe situations that are not 
worth trying to fix or heal. The message is to simply walk away, to escape in the 
best way you can, regardless of the temptation of staying. 

The Devil often arrives in a relationship reading to show lust and negative 
ways of relating, in that one partner is gaining much more that the other. By 
extension of this, additional meanings of the Devil are addiction—issues with 
sex, food, substance abuse, and overall negative thinking patterns. 

Some other specifics include the following: 

& Home: Here, the Devil may indicate living with domineering people or 
dealing with a difficult landlord. Psychic vampires and generally negative 
people may drain your energy. You may feel controlled and invaded just now. 

& Relationships: Difficult relationships are indicated here, such as controlling 
partners, lust-over-love situations, affairs, and codependent patterns. For 
separated partners, the Devil may show financial dependency or other 
ongoing money or property issues that keep you tied to the past. 

& Career and money: You’re experiencing bad financial contracts, careers that 
are unsatisfying, domineering bosses, or a toxic work environment—but you 
stay because you are financially trapped. 


REVERSED MEANING 


When reversed, this is one of the few cards whose meaning becomes more 
hopeful. With the upright Devil, it’s time to acknowledge how you may be 
trapped and to begin to to search for the light. When reversed, the Devil suggests 
the decision you need to make will be easier than you think. When the card is 
upside down, the chains around the couple are more lax than they appear, so a 
situation is not quite as drastic as you first thought. Now is the time to make 
your move. 

In terms of health, a difficult cycle is about to end. Addiction and bad habits 
become easier to manage and eventually banish, and you or those close to you 
can look forward to recovery. 


HIS WISDOM MESSAGE 

In one leap, you can be free. 


THE DEVIL’S SYMBOLS 

In the Rider-Waite tarot, the Devil appears with these magical symbols. Some of 

them reappear in other major arcana cards, so learn to recognize them and you’ll 

soon find you can apply your knowledge throughout the deck. 

& The devil: He is a symbol of internal or external oppression. Showing the 
shadow side of human nature, he suggests base instincts at work rather than 
the higher self. 

& The tails: The tails show lower instincts taking shape in our lives. The 
woman’s tail shows fruit, echoing the forbidden fruit of the Garden of Eden, 
which she has now eaten. The man’s tail is devil-like and appears to be 
catching the color of the Devil’s torch, symbolizing corruption. 

& The chains: Representing control and dependency, the chains illustrate 
emotional and material bonds that are habitual but not necessary. 

& The torch: The torch is not held up to illuminate the scene, or situation; the 
Devil keeps his knowledge and his power for himself. 

& The inverted pentagram: The upright pentagram stands for humanity and 
being humane. When reversed, it is a sign of cruelty and dark forces. The 


symbol can also be seen as a representation of the Devil’s head, with the 
pointed beard at the lowest point of the pentagram and his ears and horn the 
middle and upper points. 



THE HISTORICAL DEVIL: DARK 
ARCHETYPES 

In the Visconti-Sforza tarots of the Renaissance, the Devil is a terrifying 
monster with two heads—one devil, one human—and the Devil’s mouth is 
busy devouring a small naked man. While the man-eating beast was a 
popular motif in early paintings showing the Last Judgement, myths of 
devilish gods date back to the Greeks and Romans. The Greek Cronos, god 
of time, ate his own children. He is associated with aspects of Roman god 
Saturn, who appears in the fifteenth-century Tarrochi of Mantegna cards as 
Saturno, a man holding a serpent biting its tail—making the shape of the 
ouroboros, the alchemical symbol for never-ending time. With his other 
hand, he is raising a child to his mouth, about to consume it. Four other 
children await their fate at his feet. 

In the mid-fifteenth-century Griggoneur tarots, the Devil is an upright 
figure with a human body. Goatlike and bearded, with horns and clawed 
feet, he has a strange devil’s face painted on his groin to show the dangers 
of lust. The devil-in-the-pants motif is also seen in the painting Devils 
Waiting for the Last Judgement (Livre de la vigne nostre Seigneur, France 
1450-1470). Here, the devil head over the genitals has a big laviscious 
tongue, making the message of lust and sexual temptation all the more 
evident. 

The Rider-Waite’s devil is the traditional Pan or Satan, an embodiment 
of the Devil archetype across the ages. 


THE DEVIL’S REFLECTIONS 

We can see aspects of the Devil in these minor arcana cards: 

& The Two of Swords, for being stuck 
& The Eight of Swords, for restriction 
& The Three of Swords, for conflict and betrayal 
















TRY A READING WITH THE DEVIL: BREAKING THE 
SPELL 


Take the Devil card from your deck and lay it before you. Now shuffle the 
remaining cards and cut the deck or fan out the cards facedown. Choose four 
cards with your left hand and place them around the Devil as shown. You could 
ask, “What’s controlling me?” or “How can I get out of this situation?” 

■vfv Card 1: Present situation 

Card 2: What or who is trapping you 
& Card 3: What action to take 
& Card 4: Outcome 


CARD 3 



CARD 2 






CARD 4 


CARD 1 
















XVI THE TOWER 



Alternative Names: The House of God, Fate, The Lightning 

Number: XVI 

Numerology Link: VII, The Chariot 
Astrological Sign or Planet: Mars 
Element: Fire 
Hebrew Letter: Peh (Pei) 

Symbol: Mouth 
Meaning: Chaos 

Tree of Life Pathway: Seventeenth, between Hod and Netzach 
Chakra: Crown and base, for heaven and earth 
Key Meanings: Destruction and enlightenment 


















• I MO US Ganws 

















UNDERSTANDING THE TOWER 


The Tower is aflame, struck by lightning that has thrown two figures to the 
ground. A crown, once atop the Tower, is blasted in to the darkness as nature 
asserts her power over Earth. In early French tarots, the card is named la Maison 
Dieu, the House of God, calling to mind the burning of the Tower of Babel as 
divine retribution for our sins, a story told in the rabbinic text the Midrash. 
Genesis offers an alternative story: The Tower and city were abandoned, not 
burned, when God made the Babylonians speak in incomprehensible languages. 

As with the other supposedly dark cards in the major arcana—Death and the 
Devil—there is always a way forward, provided we can accept a force that is 
higher than us and adapt to a new way of living and relating to each other. If 
we’ve been cossetting ourselves away in ivory towers, it’s time to come back 
down to earth. 

The Tower marks a point of awakening. In the major arcana sequence, it falls 
after the Devil. If the Devil is pride, ego, and arrogance, then the Tower is a fall 
from grace. It is a necessary stage of breakdown and rebuilding so our horizons 
can expand. We must look for a new place to be, physically or spiritually, and 
engage with new concepts and people if we are to progress to card XVII, The 
Star, which offers hope and the chance to follow a dream. 

The Devil’s number, XVI, comprises the mystical number 7 doubled (see VII, 
The Chariot, page 58). Also, in numerology, XVI reduces to VII (1 + 6 = 7), or 
the Chariot, which is powered by the charioteer’s determination. With the Tower, 
our willpower has no effect. Only the will of God determines the outcome. In 
this sense, the Tower, along with the Wheel of Fortune (see page 70), is a card of 
fate. 


THE TOWER’S ASTROLOGY 

The Tower’s planet is Mars, fiery and masculine, forceful and warlike. Although 
Mars’s energy can bring destruction, with this comes a release, a breakthrough. 


THE TOWER AND KABBALA 

The kabbalistic letter of the Tower is Peh, which means mouth, and also 
expression, words, and speech, perhaps relating to the Babyloneans’ speaking in 
different tongues. Another meaning of Peh is chaos—the impact of the falling 


Tower. 

On the Tree of Life, the Tower is placed on the twenty-seventh pathway 
between the spheres of Hod and Netzach, or the logical mind and the forces of 
nature. Whatever we think, we are always subject to higher forces. 


UPRIGHT MEANING 

The Tower hits us with sudden change: the collapse of an ideal, a dream, an 
organization, or a relationship. This is inevitable and is due to forces beyond 
your control. The Tower can represent shattered ego, so you may feel vulnerable 
and confused. Yet you can only surrender to the power of the Tower and work on 
accepting the huge shift in awareness it offers—although the benefits may not be 
obvious just yet. 

The upside of the Tower is its message of release. The walls come tumbling 
down, but in the moment of destruction, everything is illuminated. You can see 
inside the Tower and look at how you built it—how you lived in your 
psychological tower and what it protected you from. Now, you can experience a 
flash of deep insight. With the Tower gone, you can begin to sense how the 
future might evolve. What you build next can have more foundation. 

Some readers find the Tower an apt descriptor of migraines, with the buildup 
of pressure and intense pain. The Tower’s lightning bolt has also been likened to 
sexual tension and earth-shattering release. 

Here are some other possibilities the Tower may signify: 

& Home: The Tower can illustrate an abrupt change to your circumstances. A 
property you hoped to move into does not materialize, or you encounter 
delays to building projects, for example. 

& Relationships: A secret comes to light, which may be shocking. It is time to 
let go of past patterns of relating. Equally, you may experience an intense 
physical or spiritual attraction, which has a profound impact on your orderly 
existence. 

& Career and money: Restructuring in businesses, possible redundancies that 
may mean a move to alternative premises—the Tower signifies change. A 
person in a position of power makes tough decisions, and a leader may be 
ousted from their post. 


REVERSED MEANING 


When the Tower is reversed, you may find yourself taking responsibility even 
when you are blameless. It can also show you have held on to a career, project, 
or relationship that is not strong enough to stand the test of time. If you have 
clung to the past to protect yourself from reality, your fears may materialize. The 
Tower’s collapse is inevitable, so do not feel responsible for forces outside your 
control. Its impact is sudden and dramatic, and soon you will know exactly 
where you stand. 


ITS WISDOM MESSAGE 

Surrender. 


THE TOWER’S SYMBOLS 

In the Rider-Waite tarot, the Tower appears with these magical symbols. Some of 

them reappear in other major arcana cards, so learn to recognize them and you’ll 

soon find you can apply your knowledge throughout the deck. 

& The tower: Illustrating society, protection, and the ego, a lone tower can also 
symbolize the past. 

See the symbol of the watchtowers on card XVIII, The Moon. 

& The falling figures: The figures symbolize humanity at the mercy of God and 
the power of nature. They also represent the fallout that disaster can bring— 
emotional, physical, and financial. 

& Fire: Fire is the element associated with Mars, both the planet and the Roman 
god of war. It symbolizes change, rebirth, and purification. 

See this symbol as a negative aspect in card XV, The Devil, on his torch, 
and as a positive symbol of growth on card XIX, The Sun. 

& The golden droplets: On the Rider-Waite card, the flames emit golden 
droplets in the form of the Hebrew letter J, meaning fire. There are twenty- 
two, the number of letters in the Hebrew alphabet and the number of major 
arcana cards in a traditional tarot deck. 

See this symbol on card XVIII, The Moon. 


& Lightning bolt: The lightning bolt is a symbol of enlightenment and 
purification, revealing what has been hidden. In a flash, we are spiritually 
awakened and cleansed of negative karma. 

& The falling crown: The crown is a symbol of power and sovereignty. The 
falling crown shows that worldly power no longer holds—nature is a far 
greater force. We are not in control or protected by our ego anymore. 


THE HISTORICAL TOWER: PUNISHMENT 
AND PURIFICATION 

Throughout the years of tarot history, the Tower has always been burning, 
although with minor variations. The Visconti-Sforza cards of the 
Renaissance era show a cross at the bottom of the Tower, a symbol of 
resurrection after chaos. This may reference attacks on the Catholic faith 
by heretics, which were common in the fifteenth century. The Tower, a 
symbol of the power of the Church, is not struck down by God—the 
flames appear to have been created by the intense heat from two suns, 
symbols of diverse political forces. On our Rider-Waite card, the burning 
Tower links with Midrash’s account of the fall of the Tower of Babel. It 
may also be a depiction of God’s punishment of the cities of Sodom and 
Gomorrah, which were burned to the ground in retribution for the people’s 
sins. 

The lightning bolt is a magical symbol in many myths and belief 
systems: A flash of lightning from Zeus impregnated Semele, Princess of 
Thebes, with her son, Dionysus, the god of wine—thus the lightning bolt is 
a nod to the shift in consciousness that the Tower brings. Buddhism has its 
own sacred lightning bolt, a djore (Tibet) or vajra (India), a symbol for the 
purification of the mind, which, in a flash, releases the negative karma with 
which we are born. 


THE TOWER’S REFLECTIONS 

We can see aspects of the Tower in these minor arcana cards: 

& The Seven of Swords, for loss 
& The Three of Swords, for sorrow and pain 
& The Five of Cups, for loss and upset 
& The Eight of Cups, for emotional upheaval 
& The Ten of Wands, for overwhelm and burdens 

















TRY A READING WITH THE TOWER: LETTING GO 


Take the Tower from your deck and lay it before you. Now shuffle the remaining 
cards and cut the deck or fan out the cards facedown. Choose six cards with your 
left hand and place them around the Tower, as shown. You could ask, “What will 
be released?” or “Is my present position in my career/relationship/home secure?” 

vfO Card 1: The foundation: the past 
& Card 2: Emotional reasons for your tower 
& Card 3: The financial benefits of your tower 
& Card 4: What needs to be released 
& Card 5: Emotional outcome 
vfv Card 6: Practical outcome 


CARD 4 



CARDS 





CARD 6 


CARD i 


CARD 2 


CARD 1 














Alternative Names: Hope, The Stars 
Number: XVII 

Numerology Link: VIII, Strength 
Astrological Sign or Planet: Aquarius the Water Carrier 
Element: Air 
Hebrew Letter: Tzaddi 
Symbol: The fishhook 
Meaning: Hope 

Tree of Life Pathway: Eighteenth, between Yesod and Netzach 

Chakra: Higher heart, for universal love 

Key Meanings: Hope, guidance, inspiration, and creativity 
















• 1990 U S 














UNDERSTANDING THE STAR 


Like the water carrier of her zodiac sign of Aquarius, a maiden is pouring water 
from two vessels, one onto the earth and the other into a pool. It is twilight, but 
we can see clearly a tree and a tiny bird on the right of this serene landscape. At 
one with the natural world, this woman is a maiden aspect of the earth goddess, 
or card III, The Empress. Her nakedness under the stars shows purity and truth, 
and she is connected with the cosmos and the divine. There are eight stars above 
her, and one of them, a guiding star, is much bigger than the others. The Star 
card reveals hope and guidance. 

In the major arcana sequence, the Star comes after XVI, The Tower, and 
before XVIII, The Moon. After the Tower’s destruction, the maiden and her stars 
are a sign of hope for a new world. The cycles of nature continue, present in the 
four elements represented on the card: Earth, Air, and Water, with Fire suggested 
by the yellow guiding star. Pouring calming water onto the earth and into the 
pool, she heals the past and the present. 

The Star’s number, XVII, comprises 7 and 1, adding up to 8, or VIII, 

Strength. Strength shows a clothed woman holding the jaws of a lion, in a bid to 
control dangerous instincts. In the Star, the maiden has ascended to a more 
conscious state of awareness. She can let the water flow, trusting that she is on 
her path. In some decks, this card may show a winged maiden to illustrate 
angelic guidance. 


THE STAR’S ASTROLOGY 

The Star’s sign is Aquarius the Water Carrier (January 21-February 19), and the 
element of the card is Air. Water represents insight, consciousness, and healing 
and Air, thought and idealism, suggesting the social conscience with which 
Aquarians are so often attributed. 


THE STAR AND KABBALA 

The Hebrew letter of the Star is Tzaddi, meaning the fishhook; it also takes the 
meaning of hope. On the Tree of Life, the Star is placed on the eighteenth 
pathway, between the spheres of Yesod and Netzach. Yesod is the sphere of 
magic and the moon, while Yesod stands for sensual passion and instinct. The 
Star is therefore the result of both these aspects, bringing together the qualities of 



the sun and moon to create a new Earth. 


UPRIGHT MEANING 

The Star offers hope and guidance, so if things have felt difficult recently, have 
faith that your luck is about to change for the better. The Star is a powerful 
symbol of hope, and you can begin to appreciate everything life has to offer, 
including better physical and spiritual well-being. The Star supports beauty, and 
creativity flows like the star-maiden’s water. In your projects and relationships, 
you can be fully expressed, sharing your love, gifts, and talents. The Star allows 
you to shine and show your Star quality, so your efforts are appreciated. You 
may also feel more intuitive and insightful under the Star’s influence and have 
more trust in messages from your angels and guides. 

The Star also shows good health. It is the card of the healer and is 
traditionally associated with astrology. 

The Star can also indicate the following: 

& Home: You feel inspired to create beauty and style in your home, so craft 
projects and design are especially favored now. If you have your eye on a 
dream home, it will come to you. 

& Relationships: The Star shows that you are destined to be with someone; it is 
time to find a soul mate. Other existing relationships are calm and 
harmonious. 

vfO Career and money: The Star brings money luck. Work you do begins to pay 
off, as you have considered your long-term goals and given attention to what 
matters most. Entrepreneurs may be guided to begin a new business, or you 
find you have a hidden talent you can put to good use. The Star can also show 
awards and fame. 


REVERSED MEANING 

In the reversed position, the Star can show giving up too easily in your projects 
and experiencing a creative block. You may be too attached to a fantasy scenario 
—after all, starlight is bewitching—while overlooking the details. Alternatively, 
you may feel lulled into a false sense of security in a venture that has no 
foundation and little chance of success. An additional meaning is feeling alone 


just now, without the support you need. 


ITS WISDOM MESSAGE 

Be inspired—dreams come true. 


THE STAR’S SYMBOLS 

In the Rider-Waite tarot, the Star appears with these magical symbols. Some of 

them reappear in other major arcana cards, so learn to recognize them and you’ll 

soon find you can apply your knowledge throughout the deck. 

& The eight stars and guiding star: Hope and divine guidance are embodied by 
the stars. The central yellow star, according to A. E. Waite, is a symbol of 
Freemasonry called the Flamboyant Star, or Seal of Solomon. (Waite had 
become a Freemason in 1901.) However, this talisman is usually shown with 
six rather than eight points, so perhaps this was to be just one aspect of its 
meaning. The star may also represent Sirius, or Venus (see The Historical 
Star). The eight stars each have eight points, symbolizing renewal. Eight is 
also the sum of the Star’s number, 17. 

See the star crown and canopy of stars on card VII, The Chariot. 

& The maiden: A symbol of eternal youth and the creative soul, she may be the 
Greek Aphrodite or the Egyptian deity Isis (see The Historical Star). 

See the maiden as a symbol of civilization on card VII, Strength. 

& The bird: The bird may symbolize the dove of Aphrodite or the ibis of Isis 
(see History). The ibis may be an intentional link with the card’s Hebrew 
letter Tzaddi, which, according to tarot scholar Jonathan Dee, is “the perfect 
fishhook.” The ibis also links with the Egyptian god Thoth, who was 
sometimes shown with the head of an ibis, one of his sacred creatures. In 
general, birds are symbols of freedom and the soul. 

& Flowing water: This is the water of life, symbolizing resourcefulness and 
healing. The star-maiden pours water into the pool and onto the earth to 
nourish it, just as the goddesses Venus and Isis brought fertility to the land. 


THE HISTORICAL STAR: GODDESSES AND 
ANGELS 

The image of the maiden and star has altered little over the centuries, from 
its simplest form in the Visconti-Sforza tarots—a woman holding a star— 
to the more illustrative Rider-Waite image, to which is added a pool, tree, 
and bird. 

The star maiden herself may be Greek love and fertility goddess 
Aphrodite, the Roman Venus, who is often pictured with a dove. If so, the 
star above her is Venus, the Morning Star. An alternative identity is the 
Egyptian Isis, queen of magic and fertility, associated with the Ibis bird. If 
this is so, the big star is her symbol, Sirius, also known as the Star of Isis, 
fertility omen of the Nile. Legend has it that when Sirius, the brightest star 
in the night sky, appeared, the Nile flooded, watering the crops growing on 
the silt bed of the delta. 

In some decks, the star-maiden is an angel. The card also embodies 
Faith, one of the “lost” virtue cards of the tarot that existed in early decks. 
The early Faith cards of the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries show a female 
figure holding in one hand one cup and in the other hand a cross. In this 
way, perhaps Faith’s cup became subsumed into the two vessels of the Star, 
and her cross, symbol of religious guidance, went up to the heavens to 
become one of the eight stars in the sky. 


THE STAR’S REFLECTIONS 

We can see aspects of the Star in these minor arcana cards: 

$x£ The Three of Coins, for creativity 
& The Six of Cups, for harmony 
& The Nine of Cups, for luck and a wish come true 
& Ace of Wands, for creativity and inspiration 
& Six of Wands, for victory and acknowledgment 
















& The Ace of Coins, for beginnings and money luck 
& The Nine of Coins, for comfort and contentment 


TRY A READING WITH THE STAR: WISH UPON A STAR 

Take the Star from your deck and lay it before you. Now shuffle the remaining 
card, and cut the deck or fan out the cards facedown. Choose five cards with 
your left hand and place them around the Star, as shown. You could ask, “What 
will inspire me?” or “Will my wish come true?” 

& Card 1: You/your present situation 
& Card 2: Your wish 
& Card 3: The outcome 
& Card 4: What hinders you 
& Card 5: What helps you 



CARD 4 


CARD 5 









XVIII THE MOON 


Alternative Names: Illusion, Luna 
Number: XVIII 

Numerology Link: IX, The Hermit 
Astrological Sign or Planet: Pisces the Fish 
Element: Water 
Hebrew Letter: Qoph ( Kuf) 

Symbol: The back of the head 
Meaning: Hidden problems 

Tree of Life Pathway: Nineteenth, between Malkuth and Netzach 

Chakra: Third eye, for intuition 

Key Meanings: Illusion, dreams, and crisis 


















THE MOON. 


« 1990 US 





















UNDERSTANDING THE MOON 


The Moon is a card of duality and emotional turmoil, with its two foreboding 
towers and two howling dogs. One dog appears domesticated while the other is 
wild—a wolf, even—representing the dual aspects of internal conflict. The sun- 
moon above appears to gaze upon the scene below, but the eyes are closed; the 
solar aspect, the perspective of daylight, is blind under moonlight. The central 
crayfish appears to struggle halfway between the water toward land. Something 
very important is about to surface. 

The crayfish stands for the fearful self. He can just glimpse the long and 
winding road that yawns beyond the dogs and the towers. He senses that others 
have trodden this path before, but can he follow? And if he does, is there reward 
for taking this risk? Under the light of the sun-moon, what he is seeing may be 
an illusion, pure fantasy. As A. E. Waite says, “The card represents the life of the 
imagination apart from the life of the spirit.” This is the dark night of the soul, a 
lonely time when there is little but moonlight to guide us. We, like the crayfish, 
will need to make a decision in order to resolve the conflict between staying safe 
in a place we know and taking on the challenge of the unknown. 

In the major arcana sequence, the Moon rises after card XVII, The Star, and 
before XIX, The Sun. With the Star, we have realized our guidance, the path we 
must follow, and the Moon shows the hidden impact of this realization, when 
deep-seated doubts and fears are realized. The Sun is the resolution of this dark 
night, a sanctuary before we make our final Judgment on our actions before the 
ending and beginning of our journey with the World. To heal the conflict of the 
Moon, we need to embody our higher self, our soul wisdom. 

The Moon’s number, XVIII, or 18, adds up to 9—IX, the number of the 
Hermit. Both the Moon and the Hermit show being alone and a time for self¬ 
reflection. 


THE MOON’S ASTROLOGY 

The Moon’s sign is Pisces, the Fish (February 20-March 20), whose element is 
emotional Water. In astrology, the Moon in Pisces means compassion and 
intuition. Pisces the Fish and stands for the soul, as well as sexuality and 
creativity. 



THE MOON AND KABBALA 


The Hebrew letter of the Moon is Qoph or Kuf, meaning the back of the head 
and hidden problems. On the Tree of Life, the Moon is on the nineteenth 
pathway between the spheres of Malkuth and Netzach, or the logical mind and 
the unseen forces of nature—or what is ruminating under the surface. 


UPRIGHT MEANING 

The Moon’s traditional meaning is a crisis of faith and a period of emotional 
vulnerability. It reveals misgivings about a situation, as you cannot be sure if 
what you are seeing is the truth. Under the light of the Moon, is what you are 
seeing an illusion? Or does the Moon bring to light the essence of a problem that 
needs attention? This may be a time of deep emotional conflict, and the struggle 
is private rather than shared. 

You have a decision to make, and to choose wisely, you need to rely on your 
senses rather than logic. Take note of your intuitive messages and dreams now 
and acknowledge them as valid sources of information that will lead you in the 
right direction. The Moon can show you being asked to take a risk, to broaden 
your life experience. The prospect may make you uncomfortable, but the Moon 
asks you to dive deep and examine the real cause of unrest. 

The Moon can also suggest the following: 

& Home: You could be feeling disillusioned about your current living situation 
or having second thoughts about a move or home improvement project that is 
proving more costly than anticipated. On a positive note, you may intuitively 
find an object you thought was lost. 

& Relationships: Confusion and disappointment reign as someone lets you 
down. A lack of trust that a relationship will work leads you to a love 
decision. 

& Career and money: You may achieve a goal but ultimately feel it was not 
worth the effort. With colleagues, emotions run high, and you may need to 
protect yourself from others’ negativity. Money matters are stable, but you 
want more satisfaction from work than just the paycheck. 


REVERSED MEANING 


When the Moon is reversed, you may avoid difficult emotions and 
confrontations, so your needs are not expressed or recognized. A trauma is 
ignored again rather than explored, so the Moon reversed can show you going 
back to old ways of coping with the past. The card can also show you feeling 
stuck in an old emotional pattern that keeps arising—until you give it attention. 


ITS WISDOM MESSAGE 

Be guided by messages from your unconscious. 


THE MOON’S SYMBOLS 

In the Rider-Waite tarot, the Moon appears with these magical symbols. Some of 

them reappear in other major arcana cards, so learn to recognize them and you’ll 

soon find you can apply your knowledge throughout the deck. 

& The crayfish: This creature is a symbol of the primal self, which in this 
environment is not at peace and is struggling to surface, like subconscious 
fears. 

& The wolf and dog: The canines show fear of the unknown. They also are 
guardians of experience, representing a rite of passage. The wolf is wild 
instinct and the dog, the tamed self. 

See the dog on card 0, The Fool. 

& The watchtowers or gates: These are the gates of Hades in classical 
mythology (see The Historical Moon). In a reading, these represent the 
boundary between the unconscious and conscious self. 

See this symbol on card XIII, Death. 

& The sun-moon: A full moon, crescent moon, and sun are merged. The moon is 
the subconscious aspect that affects how we behave in the solar world, which 
dominates the sleeping sun. 

See the sun on card XIX, The Sun; VI, The Lovers; and 0, The Fool. 

& The golden droplets: There are fifteen droplets in the shape of the Hebrew 
letter J, which means fire. This creates a strong tension with the water below 
the sun, which in combination symbolize conflict. A. E. Waite calls these 
droplets “the dew of thought” that emanate toward the world of the moon, or 


intuition and imagination. 

See this symbol on card XVI, The Tower. 

& The path: The unknown—the path is poorly lit and only reflected light may 
guide us upon it. 

See this symbol on card XIV, Temperance. 


THE HISTORICAL MOON: URANIA, DIANA, 
AND HECATE 

As early tarot cards developed, three distinct Moon cards evolved, inspired 
by lunar goddesses. The Tarocchi of Mantegna has two lunar goddess 
cards, Luna and Urania. Luna holds a crescent moon while riding her 
chariot across the skies, while Urania shows a goddess with a blank circle 
and astronomer’s compass. 

Luna is closely identified with the lunar goddess Diana the huntress 
(Artemis), often shown in traditional art with a bow and arrow. The Moon 
card of the Visconti-Sforza tarots shows Luna-Diana: She holds a crescent 
moon and what appears to be the skein from her bow, loose and useless—a 
symbol of failure and confusion. The fifteenth-century Griggoneur cards, 
however, took Urania as their inspiration. Urania, the muse of astronomy, 
carries a compass and globe in traditional paintings and statuary. On the 
Griggoneur Moon card, two astrologers stand under a waning moon; one 
holds his compass up while the other rests his on a book, as if making a 
calculation. 

On the surface, the Rider-Waite card with its strange crayfish has a very 
different ancestry, dating back to a deck of around 1750 made by Joannes 
Palegius Mater, and Court de Gebelin’s book Le Monde Primitif of 1781— 
yet, like the Moon card itself, a peek beneath the surface shows more than 
expected. The two towers and dogs are the symbols of Hecate, dark deity 
of magic—who is a shadow aspect of Luna-Diana. Hecate is the guardian 
of the gates of Hades, indicated by the card’s two towers. The dogs are 
Hecate’s companions—ancient statues of the goddess show her with 
hounds, and in her form as a triple goddess, she appeared with the head of 
a dog. 


THE MOON’S REFLECTIONS 

We can see aspects of the Moon in these minor arcana cards: 
& The Two of coins, for weighing up your options 
















& The Five of coins, for insecurity 
The Nine of Swords, for anxiety 
& The Seven of Cups, for fantasy and possibility 
& The Three of Swords, for distress—what your heart is telling you 
& The Two of Swords, for indecision 


TRY A READING WITH THE MOON: WHAT LIES 
BENEATH 

Take the Moon from your deck and lay it before you. Now shuffle the remaining 
cards and cut the deck or fan out the cards facedown. Choose four cards with 
your left hand and place them around the Moon, as shown. You could ask, 

“What needs to come to the surface?” or “What will be the outcome of this 
crisis/soul-searching?” 

& Card 1: Significator—a card that represents you 
& Card 2: What needs to be addressed—past or childhood issues 
& Card 3: What needs to be addressed—present challenges or fears 
vfv Card 4: Outcome 


CARD 4 



CARD 2 





CARD 1 

SIGNIFICATOR 



CARD 3 


















XIX THE SUN 



Alternative Name: The Children 
Number: XIX 

Numerology Links: X, The Wheel of Fortune, and I, the Magician 

Astrological Sign or Planet: The Sun 
Element: Fire 
Hebrew Letter: Resh 

Symbol: The front of the head, or face 
Meaning: Success 

Tree of Life Pathway: Twentieth, between Yesod and Hod 
Chakra: Solar plexus, for physical health and soul wisdom 
Key Meanings: Success, good health, and a holiday 

















THE SUN 


US Garnet Syttanw. me 















UNDERSTANDING THE SUN 


In a sunny a walled garden, we are back in what appears to be the earthly 
paradise of card VI, The Lovers—yet now we are reaching higher levels of 
consciousness and awakening. With the Sun, we are seeing the cosmic light. The 
child on his horse is ready to return home, uniting his spirit with the spirit of the 
world. He is open-armed and full of joy, and his nakedness shows him as a child 
of nature. Psychiatrist Carl Jung saw the archetype of the child as an aspect of 
our developing personality. In this way, the Sun holds echoes of our own 
childhoods, revealing an opportunity to recapture our early days—an idealized 
time of innocence and happiness, free for a time from adult, worldly anxieties. In 
this sense, the Sun is one of the happiest cards of the tarot, offering sanctuary, 
growth, success, and happiness. 

The child is in direct sunlight, in full awareness of himself and his place in 
the universe. He can see his way ahead—his world so unlike the darker world of 
the preceding card, the Moon, which can only offer reflected light. In the major 
arcana sequence, the Sun rises after card XVIII, The Moon, and before card XX, 
The World. Having faced the fears of the Moon, we, like the child, now see the 
light of the world and make ready to ride toward it, arriving at card XX, before 
our reincarnation as 0, The Fool. 

The Sun’s number, XIX, comprises 1 and 9, adding up to 10, or X for the 
Wheel of Fortune, which further reduces to I, The Magician. The Sun embodies 
action and the creative power of the Magician in the earthly realm and the 
dawning spiritual realization of the Wheel, at which point in our tarot journey we 
turn toward the higher aspects of life and our spiritual ascension. 


THE SUN’S ASTROLOGY 

Naturally, the Sun is the planet of this card. The Sun is concerned with the solar, 
or outward aspects of the self, and renewed vitality after the dark night of soul 
encountered under the Moon. In the past, the card has been linked with Gemini 
the Twins as printed decks such as the Marseilles-style tarots show two children 
on the card rather than one child, as on the Rider-Waite. 


THE SUN AND KABBALA 

The Hebrew letter of the Sun is Resh, meaning the head and also success. On the 



Tree of Life, the Sun appears on the twentieth pathway between the spheres of 
Yesod and Hod. Yesod governs the moon and the unconscious mind, and Hod is 
the sphere of the rational mind. The Sun integrates these two aspects, suggesting 
happiness and spiritual growth. 


UPRIGHT MEANING 

The Sun brings success and achievement and is one of the most positive cards in 
the major arcana. If you have had a challenging time, the Sun shows that every 
aspect of your life will improve. You’ll also enjoy more energy, and if you or 
someone close has suffered from health problems, the card predicts recovery and 
a return to good health. As a card of energy and growth, all your projects benefit 
now, so the Sun heralds a good time to nurture your creative endeavors, your 
business, and the relationships you value. 

This card is also associated with children and family. It reveals good news 
about children in general and also about spending happy times with friends who 
make you smile. You may be reunited with an old friend, partner, or family 
member. In terms of a state of mind, the Sun shows you feeling carefree and 
creative, nurturing your inner child. 

In a layout with “negative” cards, the sun has the power to shed a positive 
light on the whole reading. 

Here’s some other good news the Sun can predict: 

& Home: You feel comfortable and secure in your home—you may also feel 
more like entertaining others. In particular, the Sun shows children coming 
into your home. 

& Relationships: Partnerships bloom under the sun as your relationship grows 
and you enjoy every minute together. You may also take a trip away to a 
sunny place to escape everyday pressures. 

& Career and money: The Sun does not specifically predict money but does 
show success and a position from which you can generate money. The Sun 
shines on your career, too, as you get the acknowledgment you deserve. Now 
is the time to bask in your success. 


REVERSED MEANING 


It’s virtually impossible to see any negative side to the sun, even when reversed. 
The only glitch could be a delay to travel plans, but you will enjoy a happy and 
content period regardless. 


ITS WISDOM MESSAGE 

Enjoy your success. 


THE SUN’S SYMBOLS 

In the Rider-Waite tarot, the Sun appears with these magical symbols. Some of 

them reappear in other major arcana cards, so learn to recognize them and you’ll 

soon find you can apply your knowledge throughout the deck. 

& The sun: The sun is a symbol of consciousness, happiness, and self- 

expression. The solar power of the sun signifies energy and good health. In 
numerology, the 21 rays of the sun reduce to III, The Empress—perhaps a 
link to the Empress as the mother of the divine child. 

See this symbol on XVIIII, The Moon; VI, The Lovers; XIV, Temperance; 
and 0, The Fool. 

& The child or children: Simplicity, innocence, purity, and wholeness—These 
are all elements of the happy inner child. The child appears to have six small 
flowers in his or her hair in the spirit of celebration. 

& The sunflowers: Growth, beauty, and strength—The sunflowers grow tall 
above the level of the wall, reaching upward to see what is beyond the 
boundaries. The four sunflowers may symbolize the four elements of Air, 
Water, Fire, and Earth—everything that is needed for life. The sunflower is a 
symbol of Clyde, a nymph who turns into a sunflower when mourning the 
loss of her lover, the sun god, Helios (the Greek Apollo). She always faces 
the sun, hoping to see Apollo’s sun-chariot return. The sunflower is also a 
symbol of the Spiritualist church—as the sunflower when young turns its 
head to capture the sun throughout the day, so this tells us the search for the 
light is our true nature. 

& The walled garden: Boundaries, security, and protection—A. E. Waite calls 
this “the walled garden of the sensitive life.” 

& The white-gray horse: He represents the vehicle for our soul—the physical 



body. 

See this symbol on card XIII, Death. 

& The red flag: This illustrates energy and vitality. 

& The red feather: This familiar image represents the life force. 

See this symbol on card 0, The Fool; on card XIII, Death, the red feather 
is withered. 


THE HISTORICAL SUN: SPINNING AND 
SUNFLOWERS 

One of the oldest Sun cards from the Visconti-Sforza tarots shows a male 
cherub holding aloft a glowing sun-face. The figure has one leg 
outstretched and the other rests on a deep-blue cloud over a landscape of 
blue mountains, water, and a grassy plain that ends in a cliff edge. All four 
traditional elements are present: Water, Earth, Fire (the sun), and Air, 
represented by the cherub’s cloud. 

The fifteenth-century Griggoneur cards show a version of the 
Renaissance Moon card (see The Historical Moon in XVIII, The Moon), 
but his time Artemis-Diana carries an arrow and she is stretching a thread 
or skein from hand to hand, perhaps part of her bow—or as has been 
suggested by the tarot scholar Stuart Kaplan, she is spinning yarn. This 
suggests the Norse deity Frigg, protector of spinning and women, later 
associated with Artemis. Another interpretation is a connection with the 
Greek goddesses known as the Fates, who spin the thread of life, measure 
it, and cut it when life is over: the story of birth, lifetime, and death. 

Seventeenth- and eighteenth-century cards in the Marseilles style show 
two children in the garden, rather than one child, with a wall behind them. 
Flowers begin to appear in the nineteenth century, in the Fanciful Tarot 
(1852) and the Gaudais deck (c.1860). However, it appears that the Rider- 
Waite tarot’s Sun card was the first to include prominent sunflowers as 
symbols of strength, light, and energizing solar power. 


THE SUN’S REFLECTIONS 

We can see aspects of the Sun in these minor arcana cards: 

& The Four of Wands, for happiness and freedom 
& The Ace of Cups, for love and nurturing 
& The Three of Cups, for celebration 
& The Six of Wands, for success 
















& The Six of Cups, for harmony and old friends 


TRY A READING WITH THE SUN: FOUR WAYS TO 
SHINE 

This reading takes the four elements of the sunflowers to divine your situation in 
terms of Earth, Air, Fire, and Water. Take the Sun from your deck and lay it at 
the top, as shown. Now shuffle the remaining cards and cut the deck or fan out 
the cards facedown. Choose four cards with your left hand and lay them from 
left to right as shown. 

& Card 1: Earth: finances and property—what grounds you 
vfv Card 2: Air: decisions—action to take 

Card 3: Fire: how projects will fare—communication 
vfv Card 4: Water: letting emotions flow 




CARD 1 




CARD 2 CARD 3 CARD 4 













XXJUDGMENT 



Alternative Names: The Angel, Fame, Time 

Number: XX 

Numerology Links: II, The High Priestess, and XI, Justice 

Astrological Sign or Planet: Pluto 
Element: Fire 
Hebrew Letter: Shin 
Symbol: The tooth 
Meaning: Renewal 

Tree of Life Pathway: Twenty-first, between Malkuth and Hod 

Chakra: Alta major, for the past and past lives 

Key Meanings: Assessment, and letting go of the past 

















• >990 U S &»w*» Sy*t*n». Inc 

















UNDERSTANDING JUDGMENT 


Judgment depicts Judgment Day, prophesized by the apostle Paul in his letter to 
the Thessalonians when the souls of men would be awakened by an archangel’s 
trumpet call and judged before God. The figures may be holding up their arms to 
embrace the moment of resurrection before judgment. Judgment is a personal 
wake-up call to consider our past actions. How do we judge ourselves? 

The archangel who blows the trumpet is Gabriel, and his wake-up call is a 
moment of revelation, when we can discover the truth of our relationship with 
ourselves. We may also be awakened to a new relationship with God, with our 
spirit guides, or with the angels—as one of the three Angel cards of the tarot, 
along with the Lovers and Temperance (see pages 54 and 86), Judgment can be a 
call to spiritual service. 

In the major arcana sequence, Judgment comes after card XIX, The Sun, and 
before card XXI, The World. We have reached a sanctuary with the Sun, a 
reminder of the paradise of Adam and Eve of the Lovers card, but before we can 
complete our cycle, we must make some decisions and gain some acceptance 
about the past. When this is done, we can evolve to a state of completion and 
rebirth, offered by the World, before we return to card 0, The Fool. When the 
Last Judgment of man is complete, a new world is created—which the Fool will 
discover when he incarnates once again and his journey begins anew. 

Judgment’s number, XX, is composed of two tens and implies balancing our 
past actions. It reduces to the number two, or II in the major arcana cards (10 + 
10 = 20; 2 + 0 = 2), the number of The High Priestess, who stands between the 
earth plane and the world of the dead. Judgment also links with card XI, Justice 
(whose number, XI, also reduces to II). While Justice is an external judgment 
upon us, Judgment is how we judge ourselves. At this time, we can reflect on the 
past, assess our actions, and release the experience so we can move forward. 


JUDGMENT’S ASTROLOGY 

Judgment is associated with Pluto, who was the Roman god of the dead and the 
underworld. The planet Pluto is also associated with transformation at a deep 
level. The element of Judgment is Fire, perhaps a reference to flames of 
purification and the burning of the physical body in rituals of cremation. 


JUDGMENT AND KABBALA 


The kabbalistic number of Judgment is Shin, meaning tooth. The letter takes the 
form of three upright stokes, like a W, which could be interpreted as the three 
aspects of consciousness highlighted by Judgment—the past, present, and future. 
Shin also stands for Shaddai, a name for God. One of the meanings of Shin in the 
sacred ancient text Sefer Yetzirah is head in the soul, a perfect descriptor for 
Judgment, as we mentally assess our past actions. Shin also comes up in the 
phrase SIT at haShin (the Shin Hour), which roughly translates as “the eleventh 
hour.” Judgment certainly tells us that the time is now. 

On the Tree of Life, Judgment is placed on the twenty-first pathway between 
the spheres of Malkuth, our perceived world, and Hod, wisdom and the mind— 
just as Judgment asks us to assess our place in the world according to our deeds. 


UPRIGHT MEANING 

It is time to come to a decision about the past. Great changes and opportunities 
are on the horizon, but before you can decide on your direction, certain past 
issues need to be addressed. This process is purely about how you judge yourself 
on your past actions and attitudes. In the upright position, Judgment shows you 
will feel you have acted with integrity and did the best you could. As you accept 
yourself fully, you can blow your own trumpet and praise yourself for your 
achievements. An additional meaning is being in the public eye, hence Fame, the 
card’s alternative title. 

Judgment also predicts a spiritual awakening, as you feel called to explore 
your potential. You have learned much about yourself in this most recent phase 
and are ready to go further, developing your spiritual connection with your 
guides and angels. As you receive guidance on your path, your confidence and 
wisdom will grow. 

Here’s more insight: 

& Home: You may be drawn to an old property or consider returning to a place 
that holds happy memories. You will soon need to make a major property 
decision. 

& Relationships: Love is assessed and shifts into a new phase. There may be a 
need for reconciliation, if you deem the relationship worthwhile. If you are 
single, you may revisit an old relationship and decide if it is worth trying 


again. An old friend may reappear. 

& Career and money: Acknowledgment for your successes is coming; finances 
also improve. 


REVERSED MEANING 

When reversed, you may be stuck in the past or refuse to learn the lessons that 
are there for you. You may find yourself in old patterns and not yet able to break 
free. Delays are also indicated, in terms of future plans, and you may be feeling 
trapped and unable to progress, without really understanding why. You have the 
ability to judge your actions and attitudes and then move on; the past cannot be 
changed, only accepted. Have compassion for the person you were then and for 
the decisions you made. You don’t have to live with the results of these choices 
in the future; you can decide to be free. 


ITS WISDOM MESSAGE 

Look back with pleasure. 


JUDGMENT’S SYMBOLS 

In the Rider-Waite tarot, Judgment appears with these magical symbols. Some of 
them reappear in other major arcana cards, so learn to recognize them and you’ll 
soon find you can apply your knowledge throughout the deck. 

’$>" The archangel: Symbolizing awakening, the Archangel is Gabriel, but the 
flag on his trumpet is that of dragon-slaying St. George, patron saint of 
England, linked with Archangel Michael. Michael’s element is Fire, the 
element of this card, although what we see on the card is Water, the element 
of Archangel Gabriel. The archangel, therefore, may be an amalgamation of 
both Michael and Gabriel. 

See archangels Raphael and Michael on card VI, The Lovers, and card 
XIV, Temperance. 

& The trumpet: The call of the trumpet tells us it is time to resurrect the past and 
make a decision. Heralds blew on trumpets to announce war, and also the 


presence of royalty and other dignitaries, explaining the card’s alternative 
title, Fame. 

& The dead rising: The rising dead are resurrection and rebirth. The six figures 
are shown in two groups of three that reflect different phases of the past. They 
are man, woman, and child, asking us to look at our roles and relationships. 
Naked, they are about to be reborn. The child symbolizes the spirit of the new 
age. 

& The open coffins: Transformation is illustrated by the figures rising from the 
restriction of their coffins into a new consciousness. 

& The flag of St. George: The flag bears St. George’s cross, for England’s 
patron saint. The red and white symbolize the unification of opposites. 

& The sea and glaciers: The water is a symbol of purification; the past can be 
forgiven and washed away. The glaciers feel like a paradise, a new world 
about to be born. 


HISTORICAL JUDGMENT: GOD AND 
GABRIEL 

The oldest tarot decks show one or two angels calling the dead from their 
graves, usually three people at various stages of emergence. In the 
Visconti-Sforza tarot held at the Carey Collection at Yale University, we 
see the walls of a city, showing that the dead exist in another territory. Just 
discernable is a tiny bridge between the two angels and water running 
under it, perhaps indicating the river of souls or the Styx, which carried the 
souls of the dead to the otherworld. 

In some Renaissance tarots, the angels are replaced by God. In most 
tarot decks, the dead are naked, as if being reborn, to resurrect the past in 
order to judge it, release it, and allow ourselves to be complete before we 
encounter the final card in the major arcana sequence, the World, before 
beginning our journey again with 0, The Fool. 


JUDGMENT’S REFLECTIONS 

We can see aspects of Judgment in these minor arcana cards: 

& The Six of Cups, for nostalgia and reunions 

$x£ The Nine of Cups, for contentment in achievement 


TRY A READING WITH JUDGMENT: THE SPIRITUAL 
AUDIT 

Take Judgment from your deck and lay it before you. Now shuffle the remaining 
cards and cut the deck or fan out the cards facedown. Choose five cards with 
your left hand and place them, as shown. You could ask, “How do I judge 
myself?” or “What past situation can I let go of?” 


& Card 1: Present situation 
















& Card 2: The recent past—what to look at and let go of 
vfO Card 3: The distant past—what to look at and let go of 
& Card 4: What may be blocking you 

Card 5: Outcome: what you can learn from this 


CARD 3 



CARD 1 














XXI THE WORLD 



Alternative Name: The Universe 
Number: XXI 

Numerology Link: III, The Empress 
Astrological Sign or Planet: Saturn 
Element: Earth 
Hebrew Letter: Tav ( Tau ) 

Symbol: The cross 
Meaning: Completion 

Tree of Life Pathway: Twenty-second, between Yesod and Malkuth 

Chakra: Stellar gateway, the cosmic portal 

Key Meanings: Completion, success, reward, and joy 

















THE WORLD. 


snoeei * 











UNDERSTANDING THE WORLD 


One of the most positive cards of the major arcana, the World signals success 
and completion. In the center of an oval laurel wreath a figure dances, holding a 
wand in each hand. Protected by four figures from the Wheel of Fortune, who 
are symbols of the four evangelists of the gospels, the dancer is also the Fool. 
From his humble beginnings, he has traveled the world in body and spirit and is 
about to be reborn in his own card, 0. The dancer is obviously female from the 
waist up, but it is believed that the swathe of fabric conceals the male genitals of 
the Fool. This hermaphrodite dancer shows the perfect balancing of opposites, 
the sun and moon (the two previous cards, XVIII and XIX), our male and female 
aspects, and the conscious and the unconscious minds. With the world at our 
feet, we are ascending to higher realms of understanding. 

A. E. Waite explains in his Pictorial Key to the Tarot how the World 
“represents also the perfection and end of the Cosmos, the secret which is within 
it, the rapture of the universe when it understands itself in God. It is further the 
state of the soul in the consciousness of Divine Vision, reflected from the self¬ 
knowing spirit.” We can see the World as a card of perfection and of peace. We 
are dancing all over the world, in harmony within ourselves and with all others. 

The Wheel of Fortune as card X and the World as XXI mark two key points 
in the major arcana journey—the Wheel is halfway, when the Fool turns to the 
second, cosmic phase of his spiritual quest, while the World is the card of 
completion and renewal. Before the Wheel and the World are two cards of self¬ 
reflection—the Hermit and Judgment (see pages 66 and 110). The World’s 
number, XXI, comprises 2 and 1, adding up to III for Mother Earth, the Empress. 
This fertility aspect is embedded in the World as the seed of new life and the 
new tarot cycle. 


THE WORLD’S ASTROLOGY 

The taskmaster planet, Saturn, is the ruler of the World. The planet symbolizes 
decisions and hard work and shows you deserve all your success. The four 
evangelists on the card (see The World’s Symbols) link with the four elements, 
the four minor arcana suits of Cups, Wands, Pentacles, and Swords, and the four 
fixed signs of the zodiac—Aquarius (Air, the angel), Taurus (Earth, the bull), 
Leo (Fire, the lion), and Scorpio (Water, the eagle). 


THE WORLD AND KABBALA 


The Hebrew letter of the World is Tav, symbolized by a cross, which can 
represent the four directions and four elements of Fire, Air, Earth, and Water; the 
meaning of the character is completion, the card’s message. On the Tree of Life, 
the World is placed on the twenty-second pathway between Yesod and Malkuth. 
Yesod means change and magic and Mulkuth, the earth itself: in combination, 
the ongoing cycle of birth, life, and rebirth. 


UPRIGHT MEANING 

The upright card denotes triumph, completion, and reward for your efforts—and 
for this reason, the World is one of the most welcome cards in a reading. It 
denotes deep joy and happiness, and now you can really feel your deserved 
success. Cherished projects fly, as your commitment and dedication pays off. 
Life feels balanced, too, as work, relationships, finances, and domestic affairs 
run smoothly. 

A phase is coming to an end in a positive way, and you will be acknowledged 
publicly for what you do. Now is the time to enjoy your fame, and you will have 
the confidence to take center stage. If you have been waiting for a decision or 
opportunity to manifest, the World will soon turn in your favor. You may also 
benefit spiritually just now, living more mindfully and from the heart. 

This is also a time for celebration, and in a reading, the World often reveals 
anniversaries, birthdays, and parties, so it is a great card for groups and positive 
group consciousness. You may also decide to venture out into the world and 
travel far afield. 

The World could also mean the following: 

& Home: A dream-home come true—whatever you have worked toward can be 
yours now, whether it’s successful building work or other remodeling. 

viV Relationships: Happiness and joy—you have a relationship that is fulfilling 
and loving. 

& Career and money: You’re achieving your goals. An award at work, a new 
position and/or promotion—the World shows you rising in status and being 
given more authority. You may also receive gifts at this time. 


REVERSED MEANING 


When reversed, the World shows you are ready to move on but feel blocked or 
don’t feel you are deserving of success. It can also show hanging on to one 
ambition that eludes you—and if so, it’s time to redefine what you want and 
adjust your expectations, as you may be clinging on to a dream to the exclusion 
of all else. Alternatively, you may feel eclipsed by another’s shining light. 
Overall, however, the negatives here are minor, and you will get what you 
deserve; it may just take a little longer to become obvious. In the meantime, keep 
the faith. 


ITS WISDOM MESSAGE 

Enjoy your success. 


THE WORLD’S SYMBOLS 

In the Rider-Waite tarot, the World appears with these magical symbols. Some of 
them reappear in other major arcana cards, so learn to recognize them and you’ll 
soon find you can apply your knowledge throughout the deck. 

& The angel and three creatures: The angel and the lion, bull, and eagle are the 
symbols of the four evangelists—respectively Matthew, Mark, Luke and John 
—associated with the Four Gospels of the New Testament. The animals also 
link with the four elements and four fixed signs of the zodiac (see The 
World’s Astrology). 

See these symbols on card XXI, The Wheel of Fortune. 

& The laurel garland: The laurel symbolizes victory. It is in the shape of the 
mandorla, an oval, which signifies heaven on earth and appears in religious 
icons to frame holy figures. 

See this symbol on card III, The Empress, and VII, The Chariot. 

& The garland’s ribbons: The two ribbons are tied at the top and bottom of the 
garland in a figure-eight, or lemniscate, the symbol for infinity, the never- 
ending cycles of time and rhythms of nature. 

See this symbol on card I, The Magician, and VIII, Strength. 


& The world dancer: The dancer shows joy and celebration, the animus mundi 
or “soul of the world” (see The Historical World). 

& The wands: The wands symbolize the perfect balance of opposites: complete 
self-expression and the ability to make magic happen. 

See this symbol on card I, The Magician. 


THE HISTORICAL WORLD: THE CITY AND 
THE WORLD SOUL 

There are two distinct styles of World card, one in the Renaissance 
tradition and the other dating from the 1700s—the latter is the influence 
for the Rider-Waite World and those of many other contemporary decks. 

In the Renaissance Visconti-Sforza deck, two male cherubs hold aloft 
what appears to be a circular painting of an idealized city on an island, 
showing a twilight sky and stars—perfection on earth and in the heavens 
above. The composition for A. E. Waite’s Rider-Waite card comes from the 
seventeenth- and eighteenth-century Marseilles-style cards, which show a 
dancer enclosed in a wreath with the four evangelists in each corner. The 
world dancer, and the belief that the world herself has a soul, is a part of 
Hermetic, Platonic, and Shamanic belief systems. 

What unites both styles of World card is the concept of enclosure, from 
the idealized city as a circular portrait to the mandorla, or laurel garland, 
around the world dancer—a symbol of completion and return to the 
beginning, the cosmic egg that is 0, The Fool. 


THE WORLD’S REFLECTIONS 

We can see aspects of the World in these minor arcana cards: 

& The Ten of Pentacles, for families coming together in love and financial 
reward 

The ten of Cups, for family love 
& The Nine of Cups, for a dream come true 
& The Six of Wands, for victory 
& The Three of Cups, for friends and celebration 
& The Six of Cups, for reunion and harmony 
















TRY A READING WITH THE WORLD: ELEMENTS OF 
SUCCESS 


Take the World from your deck and lay it before you. Now shuffle the remaining 
cards and cut the deck or fan out the cards facedown. Choose five cards with 
your left hand and place them around the World, as shown. You could ask, “How 
will I achieve success?” or “What reward is coming my way?” 

& Card 1: The bull: earth—security and possessions 
Card 2: The angel: air—thought and decisions 
& Card 3: The eagle: water—emotions 
Card 4: The lion: fire—desires and goals 
& Card 5: Outcome 




CARD 1 


CARD 4 












CARD INTERPRETATIONS: THE MINOR 

ARCANA 


Ace 

QUICK-REFERENCE MEANINGS 

CUPS 

Love, fertility, beginnings 

Two 

Partnerships 

Three 

Celebration 

Four 

Boredom; stasis 

Five 

Loss, sadness 

Six 

Peace; a visitor 

Seven 

Confusion; possibilities 

Eight 

Departure 

Nine 

A wish come true 

Ten 

Happiness and family 

Page 

Fun and socializing 

Knight 

A dreamer; a proposal 

Queen 

An intuitive woman 

King 

A warmhearted man 















PENTACLES 

Ace 

Money, success, and beginnings 

Two 

Decisions 

Three 

Showing your talent 

Four 

Stability 

Five 

Financial loss, exclusion 

Six 

Generosity 

Seven 

Potential for success 

Eight 

Money coming 

Nine 

Material comforts 

Ten 

Inheritance, good business, and marriage 

Page 

An offer 

Knight 

A dependable man 

Queen 

A generous woman 

King 

A prosperous man 











SWORDS 


Ace 

Success 

Two 

Stalemate 

Three 

Heartbreak 

Four 

Rest 

Five 

Conflict 

Six 

Leaving conflict behind 

Seven 

Theft 

Eight 

Restriction 

Nine 

Anxiety 

Ten 

Endings 

Page 

Gossip; contracts 

Knight 

Battles; an opponent 

Queen 

An independent woman 

King 

A strong-willed man; also divorce 


WANDS 

Ace 

News, male fertility, and beginnings 

Two 

Making plans 

Three 

Travel 

Four 

A holiday 

Five 

Strong opinions 












Six 

Victory 

Seven 

Advocacy; standing strong 

Eight 

News 

Nine 

Strength 

Ten 

A burden 

Page 

A message 

Knight 

Speed; an offer 

Queen 

A creative woman 

King 

A creative man 












The Suit of Cups 

ACE OF CUPS 



Element: Water 

Astrological Associations: The Water signs—Cancer, Scorpio, and Pisces 

Number: 1 

Tree of Life Position: Kether, for divine light 
Key Meanings: Love, relationships, and beginnings 
















ACE * CUPS. 


« 1990 U 3 Osmn SytMm* Inc 







































UNDERSTANDING THE ACE OF CUPS 


A single chalice, offered from a hand extending from a cloud, is overflowing 
with five streams of water that pour into a lake below. Water lilies flourish on the 
lake’s surface. There’s also a bird, a white dove of peace, descending toward the 
chalice. In its beak is a wafer marked with the sign of the cross, for the Host, or 
Eucharist. This may symbolize Christ, or the spark of the Divine, the life force, 
entering the chalice or womb, for fertility at a physical, creative, or spiritual 
level, reflecting the card’s Tree of Life sphere of Kether, for divine light. The 
bird, much like the folkloric stork bringing a baby in its beak, is about to deliver 
a gift. The chalice is offered with the right hand, the hand of giving (as opposed 
to the left hand, which traditionally is the receiving hand). 

Twenty-six dewdrops appear to emanate around the top of the cup stem, 
which could be a representation of semen. They are similar in form to the 
droplets on the Aces of Swords and Wands; XVI, The Tower; and XVIII, The 
Moon (see pages 176, 204, 94, and 102). While the Rider-Waite tarot’s 
originator, A. E. Waite, gives no specific meaning for the twenty-six droplets, 
this number may relate to the tetragrammaton of Y, H, V, H, the name of God in 
Hebrew, which is formed of the numeric values of the letters Yod, Hei, Vau, and 
Hex, adding up to twenty-six. 

The Aces offer the pure energy of their suits. As number ones, they represent 
oneness with the divine spirit or God. Indivisible, their energy is singular, strong, 
and purposeful. They all represent beginnings, impulses, and new possibilities, 
in the most pure and obvious form. 

Astrologically, this card is linked with the element of Water, which stands for 
the emotions and life—hence the Ace of Cups’ association with pregnancy. The 
W on the cup appears like an upside-down M—and if so may stand for mother, 
or the Hebrew letter, Mem, whose associated symbol is water, for the emotions, 
reminding us of the traditionally feminine element of the suit of Cups. 


UPRIGHT MEANING 

The Ace of Cups brings the gift of love and key emotional events: fertility, 
pregnancy, birth, and motherhood; when not predicting a pregnancy, it can reveal 
that being a parent and/or partner takes priority over work, finances, and 
projects. In relationships, the card denotes falling in love, passion, and a 
significant new partnership. In existing relationships, it signifies loves and 



support. Positive emotions flow. 

If you are nurturing a new project, this Ace heralds creativity and growth, so 
make time for activities you enjoy, and you will see them flourish. An enterprise 
you hold dear will come to fruition, so it’s time to turn to your novel, business 
concept, or travel plan and give it your full attention. This is also a great card for 
spiritual growth, so you may find yourself discovering a belief system or other 
important way to explore your spirituality. 

Generally, this is a time for love, kindness, conviviality, and good friends, the 
simple joy in living each day and appreciating every moment. 

In a reading, one Ace brings a focus on the life area according to the suit, 
which can set the theme of the reading. If two or more Aces appear near each 
other in a reading, it means the following: 

& Two Aces: An important partnership 
vfO Three Aces: Good news 

& Four Aces: Excitement, beginnings, and potential 


REVERSED MEANING 

As you might expect from the meaning of the upright card, when reversed, the 
Ace suggests fertility issues and creative block. There may be lack of space and 
time to nurture your relationships and projects, or you may be the one feeling 
neglected; conversely, you may be feeling exhausted due to others’ emotional 
demands. If you are asking about a new relationship, sadly, the reversed One can 
indicate disappointment and confusion—a potential new love does not develop 
into something more lasting. 

In general, the reversed card reveals insecurity and doubt, and you may not 
feel you can believe in those people you’d like to trust. Follow your instincts and 
hold on to your self-belief; thankfully, this influence will not last. 



Element: Water 

Astrological Association: Venus in Cancer 
Number: 2 

Tree of Life Position: Chockmah, the sphere of wisdom 
Key Meanings: Love and partnerships old and new 

















• '*90US Gamm 























UNDERSTANDING THE TWO OF CUPS 


A man and a woman face each other, eye to eye, each offering the other a cup. 
Between them is a strange symbol: the caduceus of Hermes and a lion’s head. 
The caduceus is a central rod entwined by two snakes, an ancient symbol of 
negotiation and balance associated with the winged Greek messenger-god, 
Hermes, the Roman Mercury. The lion, although not given a specific meaning by 
the card’s creator, A. E. Waite, can be interpreted as a symbol of passion and 
protection. 

The maiden is dressed in the colors of the High Priestess (see page 38)— blue 
and white—while the young man wears a tunic and boots similar to those of the 
Fool, card 0; even the colors of his tunic—yellow, red, and black—are similar to 
those of the Fool. The combination of the Fool’s meaning of beginnings and risk 
along with the virginal High Priestess’s intuition reveals that a brand-new 
relationship may be in the cards. The maiden is crowned with an olive garland, 
while our Fool sports a garland of red flowers; together, the garlands signify 
success and love. Their cups tell us that they are showing their emotions, and the 
man’s hand is reaching out toward the woman’s cup—a signifier of sexual 
intention, as cups are traditionally a womb symbol, just as the wand is phallic. 

On the kabbalistic Tree of Fife, the sphere associated with this card is 
Chockmah, the sphere of wisdom, the father, and male virility. 

Astrologically, this card is linked with Venus in Cancer, a pairing that 
promotes intuition, love, and emotional support. There’s also a sense of domestic 
bliss here, shown by the idyllic cottage and green fields behind the couple. The 
number of the card, two, is for two people: relationships and other significant 
partnerships. 


UPRIGHT MEANING 

The Two of Cups represents harmony, peace, partnership, and love. In 
relationships, the card signifies a deeper commitment in an existing relationship, 
such as an engagement, moving in together, or getting married (particularly 
when it appears with the “marriage” cards, V, The Hierophant, and the Ten of 
Pentacles). There’s a great connection between you two, so your emotions are 
freely expressed and reciprocated; you feel whole and content. The Two of Cups 
also predicts new romance and strong passions, which may be all-consuming just 
now. Inspiring partnerships are favored too, so this is an auspicious card for 
getting together with a study partner or anyone with whom you share similar 


creative interests, such as writing, crafting, and other hobbies, or psychic and 
healing work. Whomever you hook up with, the relationship will be mutually 
supportive and understanding. 

If friendships have been difficult territory for you recently, the Two of Cups 
shows harmony will return, and in general, this Two shows reconciliation. Old 
arguments will be resolved as you put the past behind you. Any ongoing 
negotiations will go in your favor, too—contracts, financial settlements, custody 
issues, or rearranging your working hours or schedule, for example. 

If the Two represents you in your reading, the focus is on feelings and your 
intuition. Nurture all your relationships and enjoy the love and pleasure they 
bring. As a prediction card, it shows love: Deeper love is coming—and you 
deserve all that is on offer. 


REVERSED MEANING 

When reversed, the Two reveals relationship stress. A new romance may turn 
sour as your hopes for love are disappointed. Also, the card asks you to rely on 
your intuition; there may be a secret you don’t yet know, and traditionally, the 
reversed Two can show infidelity. Although on the surface everything may 
appear to be ticking along, pay attention to your instincts; there’s a reason for 
doubt, and it’s time to communicate openly about any fears rather than ignore 
them. 

Generally, in established relationships, the Two can also indicate an 
unavoidable glitch simply due to the ongoing stresses and strains of leading too- 
busy lives. If it seems like this is the case, try to keep communicating—there 
may be a lack of understanding between you just now, but with work on both 
sides, you can rekindle your connection. Passion may be on hold just now, but it 
can return. 




Element: Water 

Astrological Association: Mercury in Cancer 
Number: 3 

Tree of Life Position: Binah, the sphere of understanding 
Key Meaning: Celebration, abundance, family, and friendships 














• >990 U S Gxnn Syilems. «c 














UNDERSTANDING THE THREE OF CUPS 


Three maidens are raising their cups in a joint toast. They are so close together 
they almost appear as one, and in this way perhaps represent the three aspects of 
the goddess: maiden, mother, and crone—the whole experience of life. They can 
also be seen as three of the tarot virtue cards, denoted by the colors of their 
robes. The woman in white is the maiden from VIII, Strength; the woman in red, 
with her back to us, is crimson-robed Justice, from card XI; and the woman in 
red and white links with the colors of Temperance’s angel Gabriel. So Strength, 
Justice, and Temperance together give us parts of this card’s meaning: vitality, 
balance, and reunion. The feminine aspect of the card is also expressed in the 
Tree of Life sphere Binah, which means understanding and represents the 
feminine principle. 

The maidens are barefoot and free, their robes flowing, and together they 
appear to be dancing. Fully engaged with life, two women raise their cups with 
their right hands and the other toasts with her left hand. The right hand is the 
hand of giving and the left hand receives, so their poses shows they are able to 
both give and receive abundantly. The Three of Cups is also a card of earthly 
pleasures, symbolized by the garden of flowers and plentiful ripe fruits. 
Astrologically, the card is linked with Mercury in Cancer, which promotes 
sociability, fun, and going with the flow. The negative aspect of this conjunction 
is thoughtlessness and superficiality. So happy are these women in paradise that 
little else exists for them, but, quite rightly, they will enjoy their moment of 
happiness and success while they can. 

The number three is dynamic—it is the number of creation. As the next card 
in the suit after the Two of Cups, for partnerships, the Three of Cups is naturally 
the next step as two people create three with a new baby or, symbolically, with 
the birth of a creative project. Three is also the number of the Empress, the 
goddess-mother archetype in the major arcana (see page 42). 


UPRIGHT MEANING 

It’s time to celebrate! The Three shows parties and reunions—from 
anniversaries, christenings, weddings, and birthdays to a great night out or 
weekend away with friends and family. This is a time for indulgence and reward, 
to enjoy other’s company, be carefree, and have simple fun. There’s also a 
flirtatious air about this Three, so if you’re looking for a relationship, you’ll soon 
be in the perfect situation and mood for lighthearted love. 


The cups on the card are raised in a toast: There’s a feeling of abundance, but 
if you’re a wine-rather than water-drinker, or you’ve got a sweet tooth, you may 
be tempted to overindulge. However, whatever your pleasure, the Three 
ultimately reveals emotional and/or physical healing. Spending time with people 
who make you feel good raises your vibration and energy levels. This positive 
influence can also soothe physical ailments that are triggered or exacerbated by 
stress. 

As three is the number of creation, this shows a creative time—literally, with 
a pregnancy or birth, or in your creative goals. Turn your focus to new ideas and 
share them, as whatever you do will be enjoyable and well received, and even 
rewarded, by others. It’s time to let your talent shine. 


REVERSED MEANING 

When reversed, the Three of Cups can indicate a flirtation or indulgence gone 
too far, with affairs and heated emotions. In established relationships, there may 
be distance and a lack of cohesion and understanding. Someone close may be 
overly opinionated and egotistical, and the dynamics of a close relationship— 
romantic or friendship—become skewed. Emotional betrayal in friendships is 
also a common meaning of the Three of Cups. 

Creativity takes a nosedive, too, as creative blocks abound; it may be hard to 
get started as you suffer a lack of motivation and support. If so, take a break and 
return to your projects when you feel more grounded and less affected by others’ 
emotional demands. 

This card can also show irritating or recurrent health problems that need your 
attention. 



FOUR OF CUPS 



Element: Water 

Astrological Association: Moon in Cancer 
Number: 4 

Tree of Life Position: Chesed, the sphere of love 
Key Meanings: Restlessnes and boredom 















•o snoMi • 













UNDERSTANDING THE FOUR OF CUPS 


A young man sits under a tree, his arms and legs crossed. Three cups are set out 
in a row before him. From a cloud, a hand holds out a fourth cup, resembling the 
one on the Ace of Cups, symbolizing a new start. Although the hand appears at 
his eye level, his eyes are downcast—he is refusing to acknowledge the offered 
cup. Disenchanted, he appears to be looking discontentedly at the three cups on 
the grass as if to indicate that the fourth cup, whatever it may represent, is bound 
to be just more of the same old thing. This is in sharp contrast to the Three of 
Cups, in which the cups are held aloft in celebration (see page 124). The young 
man’s pose is defensive, and he has set himself apart from his own emotions and 
the possibility of change. 

Regardless of his mood, the sky is blue and the outlook is bright. The tree that 
gives him refuge is in full leaf. If he were to stand up and move around, he could 
enjoy the abundant life going on all around him. In this way, the card shows the 
potential for others to see your light, to see you able to stand tall like a tree, 
rooted and firm, and with branches open to embrace whatever comes. On the 
kabbalistic Tree of Life, the individual sphere associated with this card is 
Chesed, for love. In the case of this Four, it shows that love and support are 
there, if one wants it. 

Astrologically, this card is linked with the Moon in Cancer, which denotes 
sensitivity and deep intuition, which we see in the self-protective pose of the 
man, with his arms and legs crossed. The negative aspect of this conjunction is 
possessiveness and sentimentality—not wanting to let go of what we have, 
regardless of whether it makes us happy or not. 

The number four is the number of stability, which in Cups, the suit of 
emotions, indicates inertia. Water needs to flow—if it rests too long, it stagnates. 
In this way, the Four of Cups shows an underlying restlessness, a feeling that 
something is not quite right, but habit keeps the young man from making a 
decision. 


UPRIGHT MEANING 

If you are looking for a relationship, the Four of Cups shows disillusion. This 
card often comes up if you have been hurt in the past and protect yourself with a 
checklist, instantly rejecting anyone who doesn’t live up to your exacting 
standards—to the degree that even if your soul mate came along right now, you 


wouldn’t recognize his or her potential. I call this the “Will I ever meet anyone I 
like?” card. The answer is: You can and will, but it’s time to risk opening up 
emotionally again. You may think you’re ready for love, but there may be some 
past issues still to heal. If you’re in an established relationship, the Four of Cups 
shows a tinge of boredom. This may be a phase, and if so, it’s time to inject 
some romance; otherwise, you may find yourself staying in a relationship out of 
habit. 

In work and home life, the card shows a static situation—you may feel bored 
with your job or need to make a positive change to your environment. Even a 
small change will go a long way to making you feel you are going forward, so 
look around for some much-needed inspiration—it isn’t far away. 


REVERSED MEANING 

The meaning of the reversed Four of Cups is generally the same as for the 
upright card, but with a higher degree of dissatisfaction—you may be yearning 
for change but don’t yet know what you want. If so, it’s important to try new 
tactics at work and address what needs to change in your relationship or 
environment. Try to express your needs now, rather than locking them up. 

When the Four of Cups is reversed, the man’s crossed legs echo the bent knee 
of card XII, The Hanged Man. One of this major arcana card’s meanings is 
hanging around, feeling in limbo. Rather than wait for change, the message of 
the reversed Four of Cups is to take control and make life happen. Thankfully, 
this limbo is temporary—change is always possible. 




Element: Water 

Astrological Association: Mars in Scorpio 
Number: 5 

Tree of Life Position: Geburah, the sphere of power 
Key Meanings: Loss, leaving, and sorrow 

















• '990 U S Qamta 








UNDERSTANDING THE FIVE OF CUPS 


A figure shrouded in black, for mourning, contemplates three overturned cups. 
These are the three standing cups from the Four of Cups, the previous card, 
which have been cast to the ground, spilling blood or wine and water. A small 
dwelling is set above a river, which flows under a bridge with two arches. This 
may be a home that he has left behind, a symbol of past happiness and security 
he is now separated from by water, evoking the mythical Styx that divided the 
world of the living from the otherworld of the dead. The river also suggests the 
saying “a river of tears,” in keeping with the sorrowful feel of the card. The 
mourner is in unfamiliar territory, a place of sadness, away from comfort and 
emotional security—at least for the time being. On the kabbalistic Tree of Life, 
the sphere associated with this card is Geburah, which means power, destruction, 
and cruelty. The mourner is powerless in his loss, which may or may not be 
cruel; yet what he doesn’t appear to notice are the two vessels behind him, still 
standing. Three cups are overturned, but there are two that he can grasp—all he 
needs to do is to turn around and see them. While he cannot change past events, 
it is up to him to make the best of what remains. 

Astrologically, this card is linked with Mars in Scorpio, bringing warlike 
qualities to the passionate sign of Scorpio, also linked with death and the past. 
The mourner is engrossed with the spilled cups, and it’s worth noting that in the 
original Rider-Waite deck of 1910, his face was strangely red, the same color as 
the spilled wine or blood. While this may just be the artist using the same blood 
red for consistency, the blush indicates shame—shame and embarrassment about 
past actions or humiliation caused by a person or situation. 

The number five in the tarot’s minor arcana usually indicates imbalance and 
upset. After the stable, if boring, four, five brings disruption—but this is often 
necessary and can be the only way to shift energy and bring about healing and 
change. Five is also the number of humanity. The sadness of this card is 
universal, shared by all of us at some point in our lives. 


UPRIGHT MEANING 

The Five of Cups is the card of upset and loss. It often shows sadness and 
confusion due to a breakup, disappointment or arguments in a close friendship, 
or the need to temporarily move away from a family member who has caused 
hurt. The card can also apply to leaving a job or home before you are ready to do 
so—you are forced to deal with whatever life throws your way, whether invited 



or not. This card can also refer to a loss of status or money. The gift of this five 
is that there is no mistaking what has happened because you feel it in every bone 
of your body. At this point, there is no going back. But all is not lost: You will be 
able to move onward and upward regardless. The two remaining cups on the 
card can show the support of friends, family, and colleagues. 

The Five of Cups can also come up in a reading for a bereavement and the 
natural sense of loss and grief this brings. It’s also an indicator that you or the 
person you are reading for is revisiting the past, trying to assimilate old stress 
and sorrow in order to make a fresh start. 


REVERSED MEANING 

The Five of Cups along with major arcana card XV, The Devil, are the only two 
cards in the tarot deck whose reversed interpretations are more positive than 
their upright meanings. The Five reversed reveals you have already experienced 
the lowest point in a downward cycle and, as a result, are close to recovery, 
finally letting go of painful past memories. Ready to pick up the pieces, you will 
be stronger than you were before, able to face reality and move forward. 

An additional meaning of the card is meeting up with old friends and, socially 
speaking, coming back to life. 



SIX OF CUPS 


YL 



Element: Water 

Astrological Association: Sun in Scorpio 
Number: 6 

Tree of Life Position: Tiphareth, the sphere of beauty and rebirth 
Key Meanings: Harmony, childhood, reconciliation, and old friends 













• 'WOUS Got»i 
























UNDERSTANDING THE SIX OF CUPS 


The two figures on this card look odd—an overgrown child in a red cap offering 
a cup to a girl dressed liked an old woman in the garden of a manor house and 
tower. One cup stands on a stone podium with a heraldic shield, while four cups 
stand upright before them. There’s a fairytale theme at work here, which reminds 
us of childhood tales: little red cap, or little red riding hood, or even a child- 
prince awakening a princess grown old after one hundred years of sleep. 
However we interpret this otherworldly scene, it is designed to remind us of 
childhood and the past. 

The tower and watchman on the left of the card symbolize protection and the 
flowers, spiritual blossoming and love. The star-shaped blooms may be white 
datura, or apple-thorn flowers, once used in herbal potions as an aphrodisiac or 
poison, but they also resemble a species of morning glory, which blooms early in 
the day—linking with a return to the early part of our lives, childhood and the 
past. Whichever flower we prefer, both carry the meaning of an otherworldly 
state of mind: Both apple thorn and morning glory were used as hallucinogens. 
Our hearts and minds are certainly not in the present moment. 

In astrology, the Six of Cups is linked with the Sun in Scorpio, which stands 
for loyalty and strong bonds with friends, family, and partners. Scorpio is a sign 
of deep emotions and the past, again suggesting the impact of childhood 
experience. The Six of Cups’ Tree of Life sphere is Tiphareth, for beauty and 
rebirth, which emphasizes the card’s meaning of reconnection with people from 
the past. 

The number six stands for serenity and peace. The six-pointed Star of David 
is composed of two triangles, representing the concept of heaven on earth—a 
reminder that we can realize the heavenly and spiritual aspects of ourselves in 
our daily lives to enjoy harmony in mind, body, and spirit. In the Six of Cups, 
the two themes are the past and the present. The challenge is to integrate our 
experiences, reconciling our past memories with present reality to create the 
future—the perfection of this idea is summed up in the Ten of Cups, the card of 
family and full emotional expression. The diagonal cross, known as the saltire 
cross, on the podium in the Six of Cups’ garden makes the shape of the roman 
number X, or 10—again, offering an ideal concept of love on earth. 


UPRIGHT MEANING 



The Six of Cups reveals happy memories and a time to recall childhood with 
fondness. Your children, if you have them, may help you reconnect with your 
own childhood, or you are able to give your inner child free rein to play and 
have fun without the usual burden of worries. This is a time for good things 
coming from the past—reunion parties, reconnecting with old friends and more 
distant family members, or literally going back to your roots. This card may 
predict a trip home or to a place with fond memories. In some way, the past 
returns to help you in the present, too, as conversations and reminiscing with old 
friends or contacts seeds a new idea or approach. 

Overall, you will find the right balance in relationships and enjoy a period of 
peace and harmony. This Six of Cups also shows compassion and kindness, so if 
you have suffered poor treatment, your situation is set to improve. Sweet, happy 
times are ahead, and any disruptions or upsets will be soothed and remedied. 

In love, an old flame comes back, and you may need to weigh up if it is worth 
going back to the relationship. 


REVERSED MEANING 

When the Six of Cups is reversed, nostalgia rules, and you may recall past events 
with more positivity than they deserve. The card can also show you feeling 
locked in the past as a way to avoid moving on. A particular relationship needs 
to stay in the past rather than be revived. Unexpected visitors or communications 
may stir up old memories, and if so, let the memories rest—these people have no 
place in your future just now. 



SEVEN OF CUPS 



Element: Water 

Astrological Association: Venus in Scorpio 
Number: 7 

Tree of Life Position: Netzach, the sphere of endurance, instinct, and desire 
Key Meanings: Opportunities and extremes 

















• 1990US G*m**SyW««in me 







UNDERSTANDING THE SEVEN OF CUPS 


Seven cups appear to float in the sky, and a dark, anonymous figure seems to 
behold or even command them. Each cup has its own mini-cloud, rather like the 
Ace of Cups itself. And like the Ace multiplied, this card offers us seven 
potential gifts or beginnings—but it is up to us to discern what is feasible. At the 
moment, we’re like the foreground figure: in the shadows, trying to discern 
reality from fantasy. 

Each cup has an emergent symbol. The first cup shows a male face with curly 
hair, which echoes that of Archangel Michael, the angel of Temperance, card 
XIV, indicating a higher force may be at work. It can also be seen as your own 
reflection, a sign of your future potential. The tiny covered figure in the central 
cup symbolizes what is hidden and can be regarded as a symbol of Christ and 
ascending consciousness—the shadow figure, perhaps, is sensing a divine plan 
yet to be revealed. 

The snake in the third cup stands for wisdom and flattery. (The snake also 
appears on card VI, The Lovers, and X, The Wheel of Fortune.) The tower on 
the rock appears to be a fantasy castle—as A. E. Waite says, “the images are 
most especially those of the fantastic spirit.” The fifth cup shows overflowing 
jewels, for riches and abundance. The sixth cup shows a victory wreath like that 
on the Six of Wands, but on the cup itself is a shadowy likeness of a skull, 
casting doubt on this positive meaning—even this wreath-cup, the most obvious 
of symbols, is not what it seems. The wreath can mean fame, or reputation, 
which triumphs over death, just as in the procession of triumphs in the major 
arcana sequence (see page 11). The seventh cup shows a salamander or dragon 
with a forked tongue. Who knows if what we hear are lies or truth? 

All in all, the this card’s seven images, according to Waite, are those of 
“reflection, sentiment, imagination, things seen in the glass of contemplation.” 
They are not real—yet. 

In astrology, the Seven of Cups is linked with Venus in Scorpio, which stands 
for mad passions and extreme reactions. This meaning links with the 
interpretation for the reversed card, which can indicate obsessive thinking. 
Netzach, the card’s Tree of Life sphere, means endurance and desire—in this 
card, we might interpret this as ongoing fantasy. 

The number seven is a mystical number. It was sacred to the god Apollo, 
founder of the famous Delphic oracle, and is the number of the days of the week, 
the deadly sins, and the wonders of the world (see The Chariot, page 58). Seven 
represents possibilities: It comprises three, the number of heaven, and four, the 


number of earth—and so the potential to bring heaven down to earth, to manifest 
an ideal. 


UPRIGHT MEANING 

Choices and confusion—While the seven brings the potential for amazing 
opportunities, these options and offers are insubstantial. At present, it’s not clear 
what’s feasible and what is fantasy, as everything feels up in the air, just like the 
floating cups on the card itself. Be discerning and find out what you can about 
each possible path, but ultimately you’ll need to choose by paying attention to 
your instincts and emotions. This is not a test of logic: Go with the flow and trust 
your inner knowing. Don’t msh. In relationships, the card can show new 
doorways opening again as joint finances improve. 

The Seven is also the card of the visionary and shows the beginning stages of 
a new project, when anything is possible. Dreams and visions are additional 
interpretations. 


REVERSED MEANING 

The reversed Seven of Cups has much the same meaning as the upright card, but 
here, extreme emotions are in play. Be aware of the danger of idealizing a 
situation and avoiding a difficult truth; in relationships, the card can mean being 
deceived by appearances—a new lover may not be faithful. This is not the right 
time for commitment. Avoid becoming embroiled in drama; step back until your 
options are clear. 




Element: Water 

Astrological Association: Saturn in Pisces 
Number: 8 

Tree of Life Position: Hod, the sphere of majesty and the mind 
Key Meanings: Departure, change, and emotional intelligence 























• '990U S Omt 













UNDERSTANDING THE EIGHT OF CUPS 


Like card XVIII, The Moon, we see the sun and moon combined. Which will 
reign—the sun (the mind) or the moon (impulse and intuition)? This is 
nighttime, the moon’s realm: Our hero turns away from his familiar surroundings 
under her light, guided by his instincts alone. The sun will have his time the next 
day, when it’s time for plans and practicalities, but for now, he must go with the 
flow, following the water toward a new destination. 

The cloaked man has found a way forward. He has navigated a ribbon of 
pathway by the low rocks, which gives way to a soft riverbank, where he walks 
purposefully, supported by his staff. This can be likened to the Magician’s wand 
or the Hermit’s staff, a symbol of internal guidance. His red cloak shows he has 
the ability to manifest his intentions. We also sense he left his cups just moments 
ago—the gap in the top line of three cups still puts him among them, as if he has 
only just said good-bye. With his back to us, he is firmly fixed on the mountain 
to the right, a symbol of challenges and new, great experiences to come. When 
he has journeyed around the mountain, we know that our hero will have an 
entirely different perspective. 

This Eight of Cups’ astrological association is Saturn in the sign of Pisces. 
Saturn, the task-master planet, in imaginative Pisces poses a potential conflict 
between practical needs and idealism. Perhaps the solution is found in the card’s 
Tree of Life sphere, Hod. Its common meaning is majesty, and in this card, it 
refers to the mastery of the mind—finding solutions and direction. 

Eight is the number of fulfilment. It comprises two fours, the number of 
stability, which, however, when interpreted in the suit of Cups, turns to 
dissatisfaction and boredom. The Eight of Cups therefore is boredom doubled— 
or at the very least, a situation that has become stagnant. Conversation, 
creativity, or money no longer flows, so it must be found elsewhere. 


UPRIGHT MEANING 

The upright Eight of Cups reveals a time of restlessness when it feels as if 
something is missing. Work and relationships may appear harmonious from the 
outside, but your intuition is nagging you. The result may be a departure. 
Traditionally, the Eight of Cups predicts you leave a situation or break an 
agreement that no longer gives you fulfilment. This should not be a hasty 
decision; only move on when you are sure that there is no more you can gain or 



contribute. When the timing is right, there’s also less drama than you would 
expect: Like the figure on the card slipping away in the night, you can take your 
leave quietly and swiftly. Naturally, you may feel sadness but little regret— 
provided the timing is right. 

Like the figure in red following the path of the river, it’s now time to go with 
the flow. You’ll soon feel energized to move on to where your interests and 
curiosity call. You can also feel content with what you have achieved. 

This card often turns up in a reading to show that you have already left a 
situation emotionally, and action will follow as you now take your actual leave. 
It can also predict a time to travel, to explore physically or through spiritual 
journeying. 


REVERSED MEANING 

What are you holding on to? Take stock: Are you clinging in to the past when 
you really do know that your current living situation has to change? When 
reversed, the Eight of Cups shows errors of judgment, so you jump too soon or 
stay too long, unable to see that there’s an alternative way to do things. At this 
point, there’s no logical solution; like the Eight of Cups’ sphere of Hod, for the 
mind and its strategies, an intellectual approach might make you feel in control, 
but the way ahead is to follow your instincts. Timing is important now, so trust 
yourself that you will know the right time to move on, without self-pressure. An 
additional meaning of the card is being abandoned, leaving you confused as 
others move on from you—with undignified haste. 



NINE OF CUPS 



Element: Water 

Astrological Association: Jupiter in Pisces 
Number: 9 

Tree of Life Position: Yesod, the sphere of foundation and the unconscious 
mind 


Key Meaning: Happiness 























• 1990 U S G *rw% 





















UNDERSTANDING THE NINE OF CUPS 


A seated male figure is encircled by nine cups on a table. Radiant with pride, he 
shows off what he has in life: joy and achievement. The cups are trophies, 
rewards for his past efforts, on display for all to see. This is a card of true 
happiness; what the man possesses can be enjoyed to the full. As the table is 
covered with a cloth, there is also a sense of banqueting, the table set ready to 
welcome a party. Secure in his role as benefactor, it is the man’s joy to share his 
riches with others. He is perfectly comfortable with this abundance, sitting 
squarely on a low bench wearing a cap and hose—both red for vitality and joie 
de vivre. 

With lucky planet Jupiter in the idealistic sign of Pisces, astrologically the 
Nine of Cups has the meaning of good fortune, prosperity, fun, and the spirit of 
generosity. Piscean’s natural humanitarianism comes to the fore, as what benefits 
our hero of the Nine of Cups will naturally be shared with others. The card’s 
Tree of Life sphere, Yesod, means foundation. Ruled by the Moon, symbol of the 
unconscious, Yesod brings together intuition and logic in balance—an alignment 
with our life purpose. 

As a nine of the suit of Cups, this card indicates emotions find their ultimate 
expression: Feelings flow. Nine also represents the triad of mind, body, and 
spirit, showing a perfect balance of all three aspects of our humanity. In this way, 
the Nine of Cups symbolizes joy that is perfectly expressed. The cups almost 
touch one another in a half circle symbolizing intimacy and connection. 


UPRIGHT MEANING 

The Nine of Cups is known as the wish card of the tarot because it foretells a 
dream come true. Whatever you hope for can now come to fruition. Joy comes 
from prosperity, generosity, and optimism, alongside parties and entertainment. 

In relationships, the Nine of Cups reveals new romance and rewarding 
friendships. Whatever feelings have been nurtured in the past can now be 
expressed as others show their hearts. The time for waiting for love is over; if 
love has grown, it will be declared fully. Friends will step closer to you as you 
feel more connected to your own heart. When fully living your truth, others 
respond. In the spirit of sharing, there is now an easy connection with others as 
projects begin and existing work becomes more rewarding. This is a time to 
communicate, laugh, and appreciate all you have. 



If you are nurturing a new project or idea, the Nine of Cups heralds its 
growth, so listen to your intuition, make time for the activities that make you 
happy, and see them flourish. Astrologically, this card is linked with Jupiter in 
Pisces, which promotes imagination, artistic flair, and generosity—so it is time, 
also, to share and own your ideas. Independence will also be important at this 
time. 

The Nine also favors good health, as old tensions dissolve, flowing away in 
the waters of the past. Now is the time to appreciate the joy of the present. 


REVERSED MEANING 

When reversed, ego steps in—and with it self-centredness and emotional 
disconnection. This can manifest as smugness. More commonly in readings, the 
Nine reversed tells a tale of narcissism: You are faced with others’ inability to 
see beyond their own immediate needs. This influence can infect personal and 
professional relationships, which suffer as others forge ahead with their agendas 
for short-term gain, leaving you bruised. However, it’s also worth asking 
yourself if you are the one overstriving for recognition, sidelining others in the 
process. 

In personal and business projects, uncertainty rules due to misunderstandings, 
and your plans may be delayed. Creativity can suffer at this time, too, with stop- 
start-stop frustration. Focus on maintaining balance and routine to help you 
navigate these difficult waters and hold on to those dreams and schemes. This 
may not be the right time for new ideas idea to flourish, but this doesn’t diminish 
your worth or the strength of your concepts. 

Take extra care of yourself and your relationships now, as energy levels may 
be low; hibernate a little until that spark returns. 



TEN OF CUPS 



Element: Water 

Astrological Association: Mars in Pisces 
Number: 10 

Tree of Life Position: Malkuth, the Kingdom, the sphere of experience 
Key Meanings: Prosperity, joy, family, and contentment 













« >990 U S SyVwnl me 









UNDERSTANDING THE TEN OF CUPS 


Here is an idealized family scene: mother, father, and their two children, who are 
dancing. We see their home, established above a river, and from the river plain 
below, the couple beholds ten glowing cups in the sky, arranged on a rainbow 
arc. The river flows, trees grow, and not one cloud can be seen. This family lives 
in abundance—shown also by their smart clothing—and they appear to be 
celebrating their achievement. This is their kingdom, their Malkuth, the card’s 
Tree of Life sphere. What could be happier than this place of security and 
contentment? 

The focus here is on the ideal of perfection. This is the perfect life, blessed by 
a vision of the ten cups; the rainbow is a symbol of hope and reward. We see 
only the backs of the couple and, although the children are in engrossed in their 
own game, they are happy entertaining themselves while their parents raise their 
arms in thanks for all they have been given. 

In numerology, ten represents completeness and perfection. In the Ten of 
Cups, this gives the meaning of greatest happiness. Out of the ten cups, four are 
directly touching, perhaps reflecting the familial connection between the four 
figures. 

The Ten of Cups’ astrological association reveals that feeling, rather than 
intellect, is foremost: The warlike influence of Mars dissipates when in the sign 
of gentle, idealistic Pisces, so the focus is on intuition and the emotions. 


UPRIGHT MEANING 

One of the most positive cards of the minor arcana, the Ten of Cups reveals the 
benefits of love and the security of family; it favors children as an expression of 
love, and often reveals that children will do well socially and academically, 
succeeding in their studies. The card therefore predicts great happiness for 
couples and families or equivalent close friendship groups. In work, the Ten of 
Cups shows peace and harmony for business partnerships and other key 
networks. Togetherness, not competition, will be your strength. In fact, anything 
you do en masse will go well now, from sporting activities, committees, and 
choirs to group trips and collaborative projects. 

In relationships, this is an emotional time, in wholly a positive way. 
Partnerships built on stability and trust become even more rewarding and 
supportive. Different generations of a family may come together and put aside 



old disagreements; it’s a common card for forthcoming weddings, parties, and 
other significant celebrations. Communication between parents and children, 
children and grandparents, and other family members will grow stronger and be 
more fulfilling. If you have been searching for a new home, the Ten of Cups 
shows this will come to you, and it will be the right property in the right location 
for your needs. 

In relation to projects, the card gives assurance that what you have worked 
hard for will finally come together. Financially, the Ten of Cups is a wonderful 
indicator of prosperity, which comes to you as a result of well-deserved 
achievement. 


REVERSED MEANING 

When reversed, the Ten of Cups retains much of its positive vibe, but with some 
irritating undercurrents and changes in friendships and family bonds. A family 
issue may need to be addressed as your routine is disrupted, or you sense discord 
in some relationships; also, you may feel that you’re not getting an entitlement, 
from respect from different generations of the family to enjoying enough time 
with children. Your plans to bring friends and family together may falter due to 
miscommunication. Equally, the need to keep up appearances prevents authentic 
conversations and understanding. 

Friends may also prove troublesome under the influence of the reversed Ten 
of Cups, and as a result, one or two confidants step back from your circle or 
introduce you to a new friend of theirs with whom you don’t feel comfortable— 
which upsets your usually happy dynamic. However, other people you prefer 
will soon come into your orbit to take their place. 

Do bear in mind, however, that these are temporary glitches, rather than major 
challenges—and that the reversed Ten of Cups’ overriding meaning is still 
positive. 




Element: Earth of the suit of Water 
Key Meaning: Love news 















PACE .y CUPS. 


* 


• '990 U S Ootwi 













UNDERSTANDING THE PAGE OF CUPS 


A fairytale page holds a cup, contemplating a fish within it—which appears to 
look up at him as if about to communicate. The fish is a symbol here of dreams 
and emotions that have taken form, so the Page is contemplating that which has 
come from the deep—or his desires and impulses. In folklore and Chinese myth, 
the fish is a prosperity symbol; in the ancient Celtic story of Fionn MacCumhail 
(pronounced Firm MacCool ), the hero eats the salmon of knowledge and 
becomes the wisest person in all the land; and in Paganism, the fish has been a 
fertility symbol associated with female genitalia. A secret symbol of faith for 
persecuted Christians during Greek and Roman times, the fish is also a symbol 
of the soul. But the Page is not all deep symbolism—there’s playful magic and 
lightheartedness here, too—one of the key meanings of the card. 

The Page stands on dry land, and behind him water flows; perhaps the fish 
has sprung from this river or ocean. The card’s element is Earth of Water, which 
suggests that emotions, thoughts, and ideas—the water—can become as 
substantial as earth, or matter. The Page’s tunic is decorated with water lilies, 
and as lilies are traditional signifiers of purity, this Page is pure of heart. His 
colors, blue and pink, stand for spirituality and love. The scarf around his hat 
flows down around his shoulders, echoing the flow of the water. From this, we 
can tell that his emotions are on show. One side of the scarf forms a scallop 
shape, another echo of the fish’s natural habitat. 

Pages and Knights in tarot are generally regarded as people or influences, 
whereas the other court cards (the Queens and Kings) are assumed to be people. 
Let your intuition guide you toward the most appropriate meaning for the Page 
in a reading by working with the card’s imagery first, then the written 
interpretations here (see also the Introduction, page 8). 


UPRIGHT MEANING 

As an influence: The Page represents sociability, good company, and fun. 
Whatever your age, the Page reveals you will feel young at heart. As Pages are 
messengers, the Page of Cups brings good news about the emotional aspects of 
your life: relationships, children, and finances (when this has a direct impact on 
your relationships). In love, he can show a new potential partner is coming. This 
is not the Page himself—he is simply the messenger—but he lets you know that 
love is once more on the horizon. While it will be tempting to rush into a new 
romance, it may be wise to hold back a little. Other responsibilities such as extra 




work and exams can’t be abandoned just yet. 

This card also favors imagination and creativity, and so augers well for new 
projects and opportunities to improve your home and lifestyle. If you have 
suffered periods of insecurity and doubt, the Page assures you that all is well and 
good times are ahead. Finances are also favored now. 

As a person: An individual with an artistic temperament, this Page is a 
dreamer. He loves company, is highly emotional and intuitive, and is naturally 
generous, sometimes to a fault. He is a good friend and happy to introduce others 
into his circle. The Page can often indicate a sensitive child or other young 
person you care for. 

As the “you” card in a reading: It’s time to enjoy life’s pleasures. 

As an influence: If two or more Pages fall close together in a reading, the 
meanings are as follows: 

"&> Two Pages: Friendship if upright; rivalry if one or both cards are reversed 
& Three Pages: Lots of social activities 
& Four Pages: A social group of young people 


REVERSED MEANING 

When reversed, the Page brings frustration and irresponsibility. Offers do not 
materialize; you may feel that life is all work and no play. As a person, the 
reversed Page is emotionally immature and attention-seeking, so you cannot rely 
on his perspective—he can only obsess about his own needs. This person may be 
living in a dream world and become very defensive when challenged. In family 
relationships, a child may find it difficult to communicate his or her feelings. 

An additional meaning of the reversed Page is intoxication—too much 
partying. It’s time to calm down and get back to an ordered routine. 




Element: Fire of the suit of Water 
Astrological Associations: Aquarius and Pisces 
Key Meaning: A proposal 
















KNIGHTCUPS. 


• 1990 U S Gvhm Sy»t*m» Inc 












UNDERSTANDING THE KNIGHT OF CUPS 


This is a proud knight indeed. With his heroic helmet topped with the wings of 
Hermes, Greek god of communication, he sits astride a dainty steed. Shiny and 
poised, he is dressed more for appearance than warfare. As traditionally knights 
all have a quest, this Knight’s quest is love, signified by two elements on the 
card: his outstretched, empty cup, symbol of his quest for the holy grail of love; 
and the river flowing through the valley, which signifies that he will follow the 
course of his feelings. The blue of his armor links with the meaning of truth 
(shown also in card II, The High Priestess), while the red fish design on his tunic 
denotes passion, along with faith (see also the Page of Cups, page 140). 

The card’s element is Fire of the suit of Water. Together, this combination 
makes for conflicting feelings: Fire and Water cancel each other out, so the 
Knight veers between bravado and ultra-sensitivity. His words may be engaging, 
but he may hesitate when it comes to action—not the ideal quantities of a marital 
knight. In truth, we would rather have the cutting Knight of Swords or action- 
hero Knight of Wands to protect us and defend the realm. The Knight of Cups’s 
characteristics are more in keeping with the idealized knights of Chretien de 
Troyes’s medieval tales, Le Morte d’Arthur —when courtship followed strict 
rituals. Love was an impossible ideal, and, often, an unattainable lady the object 
of obsession—a far cry from real, requited relationships in earthly life. Such is 
our Knight of Cups: full of potential, loud with declarations. But will his words 
of love translate into commitment? 

Knights and Pages in tarot are generally regarded as people or influences, 
whereas the other court cards (the Queens and Kings) are assumed to be people. 
Let your intuition guide you toward the most appropriate meaning for the Knight 
in a reading by working with the card’s imagery first, then the written 
interpretations here (see also the Introduction, page 8). 


UPRIGHT MEANING 

As an influence: The Knight of Cups heralds an emotional time—you may be 
bewitched by a new love interest (or even more than one), enjoy more romance 
with an existing partner, and/or other sweet things that capture your imagination: 
beauty, nature, time away from work or your usual routines, or creative pursuits. 
New friends may enter your circle. 

As a person: Idealistic and dreamy, artistic and sensitive, this Knight is a true 


romantic. His arrival in a reading shows a love prospect and even a proposal— 
which is wonderful if you have an established relationship. However, as a new 
love interest, tread carefully. This Knight is an idealist and, while wanting a 
relationship, finds it hard to articulate his true feelings. He may be stuck behind 
a persona of the perfect partner—gallant and generous—but unable to drop the 
act to let you see who he really is. While this is understandable in the early days 
of a romance, if the actions don’t match the words of passion, take care; don’t be 
swept away just yet. 

As the “you” card in a reading: Be open to real love; judge not by 
appearance. 

As an influence: If two or more Knights fall close together in a reading, the 
meanings are as follows: 

& Two Knights: Friendship if upright; rivalry if one or both cards are reversed 

Three Knights: Men meeting up 
& Four Knights: Lots of action; events speed up 


REVERSED MEANING 

The Knight reversed means disappointment—an offer that at first glance 
appeared perfect does not materialize, leaving you feeling confused and pushed 
out. As a person, the reversed Knight is untrustworthy and unreliable. He is 
hooked on the chase, the romantic or sexual ideal, but has no intention of going 
beyond the honeymoon phase of a relationship. He may also be looking for the 
thrill of new romance elsewhere, continuing the cycle of manipulation. 

This card often appears in a reading to denote a lover who has intimacy and 
commitment issues. His behavior may be inconsistent and unpredictable, but 
when challenged, he may protest that this is not the case and try to deflect the 
problem onto you. It is of course best for you to step away, as this knight has 
little to offer other than ongoing drama. 


QUEEN OF CUPS 



Element: Water of the suit of Water 
Astrological Associations: Gemini and Cancer 

Chakras: Sacral, heart, and third eye, for creativity, love, and second sight 
Key Meaning: An intuitive woman 


















QUEEN * CUPS. 


• 1990 US 






















UNDERSTANDING THE QUEEN OF CUPS 

The Queen of Cups can be considered as an aspect of card III, The Empress, or a 
mother archetype who brings love, kindness, and abundance. She respectfully 
holds up her treasure, an ornate golden chalice. With a cross atop it and two 
praying angels fixed on either side, it is a signifier of faith and spirituality. The 
chalice is closed, suggesting the sacredness of the womb and the creation of life. 

On the card are three water-babies: one holding the prosperity symbol of the 
fish and the other two a pair, like the Queen’s sign of Gemini, sitting on each 
side of the throne top. The water-babies signify the Queen’s maternal instinct. 
The choice of water-baby and beach may have been inspired by a Victorian tale 
still popular in the period during which the Rider-Waite cards were created. 

Charles Kingsley’s novel The Water-Babies: A Fairy Tale for a Land Baby 
(1863) tells the story of Tom the chimney sweep, who is taken by fairies and 
turned into a water-baby. Kinglsey tells the reader we must be open-minded to 
the existence of such things and that we know but “the very smallest” corner of 
the world—which can be likened to “only a child picking up pebbles on the 
shore of a boundless ocean.” Perhaps the Queen is sitting at the edge of 
Kingsley’s boundless ocean of knowledge, and the pebbles at her feet signify the 
elements of wisdom that come our way, washed up on the shore. These physical 
pebbles are repeated as a design on the Queen’s crown and as a cluster on the 
chalice. They look like golden nuggets, symbols of her generosity. 

The card’s element is Water of Water, for intense emotions. The throne’s 
scallop shape reflects this Water element, echoed in the scallop brooch fixed at 
her heart, pink for love. The scallop echoes Botticelli’s The Birth of Venus 
(1486), which shows the goddess rising from the sea on a scallop shell—linking 
our Queen with Venus/Aphrodite, goddess of earthly and divine love. The fish- 
scale cloak falls into the water at the Queen’s feet, while water-swirls decorate 
the lower segments of the throne so she appears as one with the water. Even the 
plait of the Queen’s hair is scale-like, and the color is auburn, just like 
Botticelli’s Venus. 

Queens and Kings in tarot are traditionally regarded as people in your life or 
people about to come into your orbit. However, you can also read the Queen as a 
general influence, so this interpretation is included last. 


UPRIGHT MEANING 



As a person: The Queen of Cups predicts the positive influence of an intuitive, 
sensitive woman. She is nurturing and compassionate, with high emotional 
intelligence. Her work may be artistic, and she may also be drawn to medicine, 
caregiving, complementary therapies, certain types of sales work, or research in 
nonmainstream subjects. Given her sensitivity and natural empathy, this Queen 
has to choose her close friends carefully—but when she makes a connection with 
a person, she treasures him or her, just like her chalice. 

This card often comes up in readings to show the ideal female partner, who is 
unafraid of intimacy while having stability and appropriate boundaries. It can 
predict motherhood and children, too. 

As the “you” card in a reading: Loving and giving, you make the world a 
better place. 

As an influence: Love and happiness are foremost—falling in love, loving 
behavior, and emotional honesty. All you need to do is follow your heart. 
Creative projects are favored, too. Pay attention, also, to your dreams, which 
hold messages for you. 

If two or more Queens fall close together in a reading, the meanings are as 
follows: 

& Two Queens: Rivalry 

vfO Three Queens: Helpful friends 

& Four Queens: Women meeting up 


REVERSED MEANING 

When the reversed Queen of Cups appears, you suffer emotional or financial 
pressure. There may be jealousy in a relationship, and most negatively, the card 
in this aspect can show that someone is unfaithful. As a person, the reversed 
Queen has obsessive tendencies, competes for attention, and needs to have her 
own way at all times. She drains those around her, so try not to facilitate her 
needs. She is not one to commit to love or contribute financially. 


KING OF CUPS 



Element: Air of the suit of Water 
Astrological Associations: Libra and Scorpio 

Chakras: Heart, third eye, and solar plexus, for love, intuition, and wisdom 
Key Meaning: A charismatic man 
















KING c<t CUP5. 


« '990 u S CUnn 
















UNDERSTANDING THE KING OF CUPS 


The King of Cups can be considered as an aspect of card IV, The Emperor, or a 
father archetype who brings structure, order, and authority. His realm is the 
emotions. 

He sits on a throne in the sea or ocean, comfortable but rock-steady despite 
the stormy outlook—the sailing ship on the horizon is listing in high winds, and 
waves are rising against a sky of white-gray. His throne is shell-shaped and, 
given this King’s apparent cool despite his isolation, echoes Greek god Triton, 
the merman who blew through a conch shell to control the rise and fall of the 
waves. 

His emblem is the fish, for prosperity and faith, or passion, worn as an amulet 
around his neck; a small dolphin or fish also leaps into the picture from the left. 
The water is green, turquoise, and gray—the many colors of the emotions. On 
his crown are waves and red jellyfish. The jellyfish may be an apt reference to 
one of the King’s zodiac associations, Scorpio, a sign renowned for its deadly 
sting. The jellyfish may also link with the King as Perseus, the Greek god who 
beheaded the Gorgon Medusa—the “medusa stage” is a term describing a stage 
of the jellyfish’s development. Jellyfish pulsate to move but have little power to 
propel themselves on their own, so they also symbolize acceptance and trust. 

The card’s element is Air of Water, for steam and clouds. As water evaporates 
with heat, so the King can convert Water to Air, transmuting feelings to ideas— 
the shift from heart to head. Like Triton, he is master of the waves and master of 
his emotions. This Air-Water combination can be challenging, however, as the 
King strives to find a balance between sharing his feelings and holding back. 

Kings and Queens in tarot are traditionally regarded as people in your life or 
people about to come into your orbit. However, you can also read the King as a 
general influence, so this interpretation is included last. 


UPRIGHT MEANING 

As a person: The King of Cups shows a warmhearted, charismatic male. He 
might be an academic, lawyer, advisor, businessman, scientist, or artist. In his 
work, he follows his intuition. In friendships, he is sociable, but, like his 
counterpart the Queen of Cups, is sensitive and needs to choose his closest 
friends wisely. For this reason, he may have one or two confidants and a wide 
circle of acquaintances. While being empathic, at times he tries to control his 



feelings and can come across as distant. He often needs time to process his 
intense emotions before sharing them. 

This card often comes up in readings to show the ideal romantic partner, who 
is unafraid of intimacy while having stability and appropriate boundaries. It can 
predict fatherhood and children, too. 

As the “you” card in a reading: Follow your heart. 

As an influence: A need exists to settle a conflict, either within yourself or 
between you and others, usually in a work or family situation. You are unsure 
whether to be logical or left-field, to go with the consensus or go with a hunch. If 
in doubt, follow your intuition and let your heart rule. In negotiations, use all 
your charm and empathy. When others feel that you are really engaged with 
them, they will drop their defenses and communication will improve. 

If two or more Kings fall close together in a reading, the meanings are as 
follows: 

& Two Kings: A good partnership 
& Three Kings: Influential men 
& Four Kings: A power battle 


REVERSED MEANING 

The reversed King reveals emotional vulnerability. If this applies to an 
individual in your life, you may be dealing with someone who is volatile right 
now. This person may be secretive, ashamed, and uncommunicative when not 
blaming others for their predicament. Thankfully, this situation is temporary and 
will change. 

An additional meaning of the reversed card is a person with destructive 
behavior patterns and possibly addiction issues (see also card XV, The Devil, 
page 90). 


The Suit of Pentacles 

ACE OF PENTACLES 



Element: Earth 

Astrological Associations: The Earth signs—Taurus, Virgo, and Capricorn 

Number: 1 

Tree of Life Position: Kether, the sphere of divine light 
Key Meanings: Prosperity, property, and beginnings 

















ACE.yPENTACLES 


• 1M0U S Qinw 












UNDERSTANDING THE ACE OF PENTACLES 


A hand appears from a cloud, offering a single golden coin. It is the only card of 
the suit to show a coin with a double border, as if to emphasis its value. The 
scene below the coin and hand depicts cultivated lilies and a rose garden with an 
arch forming an oval window looking onto a mountain view. This is wealthy 
land, where the owners can afford to grow their own lilies, symbols of purity. 

The clear view beyond the roses to white peaks signifies challenge and the 
ambition to succeed without hindrance. The message, though, is that this wealth 
is being offered to us, the holder of the card. The perfect garden, abundant with 
beautiful blooms, is an example of the prosperous lifestyle that the gift of the 
Ace may bring. The coin is offered with the right hand, the hand of giving (as 
opposed to the left hand, which traditionally is the receiving hand). 

The golden coin is engraved with the symbol of the pentagram, which appears 
on all the cards of this suit. The pentagram is an ancient symbol for the four 
elements, plus the fifth element, or quintessence—the magical element of ether 
(see card I, The Magician, page 34). The arrangement of the pentagram points 
can also represent heaven over the earth. Heaven is represented as the uppermost 
point of the pentagram, which also links with the card’s Tree of Life sphere, 
Kether, for the divine light of God, or great spirit. The five points can also 
symbolize the body’s five senses, which relate to the cards’ element of Earth, 
which is concerned with our physical experience in the world, as well as wealth 
and productivity. 

The Aces offer the pure energy of their suits. As number ones, they represent 
oneness with the divine spirit or God. Indivisible, their energy is singular, strong, 
and purposeful. They all represent beginnings, impulses, and new possibilities, 
in the most pure and obvious form. 


UPRIGHT MEANING 

The upright meaning of the Ace of Pentacles is auspicious for every aspect of 
your life. In a spread, it overrules other minor arcana cards close by (just like 
XIX, The Sun). The Ace predicts happiness and contentment; you can have what 
you desire. Traditionally, it predicts prosperity, and you find money comes to 
you quickly, either as a windfall or win, or you are shown the way to achieve it. 
In this sense, the card presents an opportunity for further attainment, so now is 
the time to receive the precious gift or opportunity on offer and use it to 
maximize your potential. You may find a way to use it to build for the future, as 


property is favored in the suit of Pentacles. 

In readings, it commonly arises to show money is coming or a new property; 
it also predicts foundation and stability, so if you have questions concerning your 
home or relationship, you will receive what you need in abundance. One 
message of the card, too, is not to doubt your good fortune. You deserve it. 

In a reading, one Ace brings a focus on the life area according to the suit, 
which can set the theme of the reading. If two or more Aces appear near each 
other in a reading, it means as follows: 

& Two Aces: An important partnership 
Three Aces: Good news 

& Four Aces: Excitement, beginnings, and potential 


REVERSED MEANING 

When the Ace reverses, it reveals greed and holding fast to one outcome. This 
desperation can cause materialistic thinking, and when you are fixed to one goal, 
other aspects of your life may suffer. The card can show unwise investment of 
time or money, so be aware of the motives of those you invest with or work for; 
this can be a difficult time when you are treated unfairly by an unscrupulous 
person or organization. Money for work you have done may not materialize. The 
reversed Ace of Pentacles also shows financial mismanagement and mistakes; as 
a prediction card in a reading, it advises not to make major financial decisions at 
present. 

In personal relationships, the card can show that someone close becomes 
grasping and materialistic and selfishly wants to keep everything for themselves. 
The card can also show gambling and reckless spending. 


TWO OF PENTACLES 



Element: Earth 

Astrological Association: Jupiter in Capricorn 
Number: 2 

Tree of Life Position: Chockmah, the sphere of wisdom 
Key Meaning: Negotiation 

























« 1790US G tmn 












UNDERSTANDING THE TWO OF PENTACLES 


A young man appears to be dancing, holding two coins joined on a green thread 
in the shape of a figure-eight, for infinity and the continuity of life. The same 
symbol appears in card I, The Magician, and VIII, Strength, and stands for 
balance, activity, and renewal. The flow of this never-ending symbol also 
suggests consistency and patience. In the case of the Two of Pentacles, the 
youth’s concern is cash flow; he appears to be dancing but is actually juggling 
his coins to respond to changing circumstances, shown by the two boats in the 
background that rise and fall on the waves. 

At this point, he is considering two options. He needs to be practical and use 
his head to make a decision and find balance, which is symbolized by his tall red 
hat—at the moment, his dilemma is all in his mind and he has yet to take action. 
Hats of this style, known as acorn hats, were worn by artisans and courtiers in 
the fifteenth century but were usually shorter than that of our coin-dancer. It 
seems his hat was purposefully elongated by the card’s artist, Pamela Colman 
Smith, to emphasize thinking, although another interpretation may be self- 
delusion, or big-headedness, which is evidenced by the reversed meaning of the 
card. 

Two is the number of partnership, and in the Two of Pentacles, the focus is on 
two people or two opposing forces. The continual tension between these two 
forces keeps the coins spinning on the figure-eight, so the situation perpetuates. 
When a decision is made, the tension evaporates. 

On the kabbalistic Tree of Life, the sphere associated with this card is 
Chockmah, the sphere of wisdom and the father, echoed in the phallic hat of the 
young man on the card. He needs to decide between two options or courses of 
action, and to do this, he needs to draw upon his wisdom. 

The astrological association of Jupiter in Capricorn reveals strength and 
resourcefulness. The challenge of this combination for the Two of Pentacles is 
the pull between paying close attention to immediate detail and stepping back to 
see the long-term impact of the actions he takes. 


UPRIGHT MEANING 

In the upright position, the card shows making a decision and in particular, 
managing money. There may be temporary cash-flow issues, and you’ll need 
consistent effort to balance the books. If your income is up and down, an 



unexpected expenditure can hit hard; this is a common card for freelancers 
whose income varies from month to month, as well as for two people in business 
together. On a more positive note, the card says that if you pay close attention to 
financial and property matters, you will manage well, even on a tight budget. As 
a personality trait in the person/situation position in a spread, the Two of 
Pentacles indicates fairness and a willingness to find a good balance between 
work and personal life. 

In readings, the card often comes up to show two properties and sometimes 
making a decision about where to live—in particular, a choice between home 
and a property abroad. This may also reveal a choice between two jobs in 
different places and weighing the pros and cons of each offer. 

An additional meaning is news that comes in writing, so you may receive an 
important letter or email. 


REVERSED MEANING 

In the reversed position, egotism and pride can get in the way of practicality. 
Irresponsible spending may cause hardship, and these financial mistakes may be 
hidden—gambling is a common meaning here, as well as a generally reckless 
attitude toward money. 

In work, you may be dealing with an unreasonable boss who is unrealistic 
about what can be achieved, putting you under needless pressure. 

The card can also show the ending of a business partnership due to financial 
difficulties; one of you may be investing more resources into the business than 
the other. The message is to observe closely just how committed you and your 
colleagues are and if the contribution is fair and equal. 




Element: Earth 

Astrological Association: Mars in Capricorn 
Number: 3 

Tree of Life Position: Binah, the sphere of understanding 
Key Meanings: Enterprise and success 



















• '990 U S Gumn 





























UNDERSTANDING THE THREE OF PENTACLES 


The Three of Pentacles shows a stonemason at work on a church, following a 
plan held up by a figure clad in a strange orange cloak. Symbolizing lifelong 
vocation, a monk stands by, observing the work on his building. Our mason 
stands on a workbench, similar to that shown on the Eight of Pentacles; both the 
Three and the Eight show a craftsman at work. The man in Eight has finished his 
apprenticeship and graduated into the Three, the qualified craftsman who works 
independently. The three coins are a part of the church’s design; his ideas are 
embedded in the structure of the building. His contribution will be lasting, set in 
stone. 

The mason is working by a half-open door, signifying that his good work and 
reputation will open doors for him in the future. He wears a tunic of rich purple, 
the color of high office in the church, to show that he is spiritually in tune with 
his talents and beliefs. This also aligns with Binah, his Tree of Life sphere, 
which means understanding. He fully comprehends his brief and knows how to 
direct his skills to best effect. 

It’s also notable that the mason appears in a public space, where he can be 
seen. He is proud to show his work, and the art he creates is accessible to all— 
which is more important than the money he will be paid. Of note, too: This is the 
only Pentacles card that shows the coins in black; they are a representation of 
lasting satisfaction rather than a reward of literal golden coins. 

In numerology, three is a dynamic number (see also card III, The Empress, 
page 42). We can interpret this as mother, father, child—with the mason as the 
mother (of his own inventions); the father, the mentor of his apprenticeship; and 
the child, the work the mason creates. 

The Three of Pentacles is associated with Mars in Capricorn, which 
highlights strong ambition and often applies to people who are self-starters. The 
challenge with this combination is too avoid obsession and sidelining other life 
aspects with their drive to succeed. 


UPRIGHT MEANING 

The upright meaning of the Three of Pentacles is rewarding work. It often shows 
you are ready to let your talents shine in public, and the card often appears in 
readings to show launching a business, receiving a commission, giving a lecture 
or teaching, or presiding over an important event; specifically, it can also show 


making a speech at a graduation or wedding, for example. 

In domestic affairs, the card can predict building or improvement work to 
your home or putting a property up for sale. The Three of Pentacles is also a 
good card for creatives, predicting that projects will be finished and appreciated. 
The work may also be displayed in a public space. 

According to tarot scholar Jonathan Dee, the Three of Pentacles is sometimes 
called the Architect, which means you establish a lasting enterprise, a project 
that “causes you to stand head and shoulders above both friends and enemies 
alike.” The downside, of course, as you succeed and become visibly successful, 
is the touch of envy you may sense around you; it may feel uncomfortable, as 
you’re not used to negative attention. This jealousy, as with elements of all 
minor arcana cards, is transitory and will not dint your confidence or harm your 
progress. Detractors can only make you stronger. 


REVERSED MEANING 

When the Three of Pentacles reverses, work is tiresome and you may not be 
willing to put in the groundwork—or indeed to work at all. This may be because 
you feel you’ve seen it all before and have become cynical about finding a career 
that will suit, or you take on a role for the perceived glamor—or the way it is 
sold to you—and later realize that the work is mostly tedium. You’ll need to 
push through the dull details or make a swift decision to move on. 

Another interpretation of the card is poor planning so a project doesn’t 
succeed. In property affairs, it can show builders who do not finish the work they 
begin. 



FOUR OF PENTACLES 



Element: Earth 

Astrological Association: Sun in Capricorn 
Number: 4 

Tree of Life Position: Chesed, the sphere of love 

Key Meanings: Security, self-improvement, and holding on to money 














• 1990 u $ Gama* SytMm*. Inc 






















UNDERSTANDING THE FOUR OF PENTACLES 


The male figure we see on the Four of Pentacles has set himself up as a king, 
complete with a simple crown and stone throne, set just a little above the town 
behind him. His purpose is to elevate himself socially and financially and create 
a stable base for his future. The red colors of his gown show he has focused his 
energy in practical ways to create a firm foundation for himself, and now that he 
has achieved this, he wears a black cloak of protection to safeguard his assets. 

He needs to keep this money for himself. 

The components of the card are almost symmetrical, expressing his number 
four, for the concept of balance. However, what is notable is how connected this 
man is to his money. He has a foot on each on two coins, one attached to his 
crown, and one held tight against center of his body. Symbolically, his money 
grounds him (at his feet); it is literally at his heart, at the center of his being; and 
at the crown of the head, it reflects his mind-set and beliefs. His arms, wrapped 
around the sides of the coin, almost look unnaturally twisted in his effort have 
physical contact with every part of its curve. He has made sure that no other 
hand can touch it, but it has also become a part of his identity. Wearing his coin 
on his crown means he is proud to show he is now a person of means and has 
risen through the ranks of the streets in the background to become a self-made 
man of note. He holds the central coin rather like a wheel—a sign that he 
believes money makes the world go round. 

In numerology, four represents stability. On the kabbalistic Tree of Life, the 
individual sphere associated with this card is Chesed, for love. In the case of this 
Four of Pentacles, it indicates love for possessions and a strong desire for 
stability—even though there may be an emotional cost, which is reflected in the 
reversed meaning of the card. 

The Four of Pentacles has an astrological association with the Sun in 
Capricorn, highlighting practicality and resilience, although super-solar 
Capricorn can be abrasive. Positively, Sun in Capricorn traits make for strong 
leadership and problem-solving. 


UPRIGHT MEANING 

The upright Four of Pentacles shows the need for stability and establishing a 
firm foundation. If you have suffered past hardship, the Four of Pentacles shows 
the tough times are over, as now your work pays off. While this doesn’t indicate 



a huge windfall (look to the Ten of Pentacles for this), you will have enough 
money and acknowledgment to feel satisfied. The card also shows protection of 
assets and traditional values. Proving a strong foundation for a growing family 
may be important to you now, so you may consider moving to a new home or 
investing in a small business that will bring you future dividends. In work, you 
attain a position that is very secure, so if your work is temporary, for example, 
the Four of Pentacles can show you being offered a permanent contract. 

An additional meaning of the card is the miser, as the male figure is clinging 
hard to his coin, but this money has come from hard work. You will value what 
you have achieved, and for now, want to keep it for yourself. 


REVERSED MEANING 

When reversed, the Four of Pentacles reveals an overly materialistic individual, 
a would-be king—male or female—who holds too fast to status and possessions. 
If this is you, try to let go of insecurity, as this can take up much of your head 
space—and feed an ongoing belief that you will never have enough. In work, the 
card can reveal that you miss opportunities because your confidence is low, and 
changes to your role may leave you feeling disempowered. It’s therefore 
important to do well in any professional or educational tests now; you may need 
to put in more work than first anticipated. 

The reversed Four of Pentacles can also suggest a person who is showy and 
even a little smug; in a position of power over you, you may find this individual 
controlling and self-centered. 



FIVE OF PENTACLES 



Element: Earth 

Astrological Association: Mercury in Taurus 
Number: 5 

Tree of Life Position: Geburah, the sphere of power 
Key Meaning: A test of resources 





















• 1990US G»m*» 





































UNDERSTANDING THE FIVE OF PENTACLES 


The Five of Pentacles features a snow scene showing two impoverished people 
suffering a harsh winter. It is reminiscent of Dickens’s 1843 novel A Christmas 
Carol and its child character, Tiny Tim, a disabled boy on crutches. The beggar 
in the Rider-Waite deck appears to be a small grown man—an adult Tiny Tim, 
still struggling to survive years on. Around his neck is a bell, which in medieval 
times was worn by lepers to warn others of their approach. He has become 
untouchable and excluded from society. 

The woman accompanying him is barefoot and gray-haired, wearing a red 
cloak. The color shows she will persist, despite their predicament—but what she 
cannot yet grasp is any possibility of change. The pair are fixed on surviving the 
elements and do not notice the window above, with its depiction of a money tree 
of five coins and a safe, solid property behind it. Even if the paupers could raise 
their heads to face the biting wind, this idyllic scene would seem a world away 
from their reality. The stained glass also reminds us of church windows. As the 
man and woman are not part of the church, and do not venture inside, there is a 
sense of being excluded from a spiritual community. 

On the kabbalistic Tree of Life, the sphere associated with this card is 
Geburah, or power; its additional meaning is destruction and cruelty, echoing the 
suffering of the two beggars. We might also interpret this harsh sphere as a 
message to relinquish our victimhood and take back our power, whatever knocks 
we endure. 

The astrological association of Mercury in Taurus is an uncomfortable, and 
often incompatible, combination. Mercury is lined with speed and 
communication, while the influence of Taurus is slow and steady. In the Five of 
Pentacles, this can reveal a contrary influence that brings frustration and at times 
the inability to make consistent progress. 

Five is the number of mankind. Five is also the quintessence, or fifth element 
in alchemy. The five coins on the card give us the meaning that there is still 
something to be discovered that is not yet obvious—like the quintessence, it is 
invisible now, but may be revealed later. 


UPRIGHT MEANING 

The traditional meaning of this Five of Pentacles is financial loss, so when it 
shows up in a reading, it can mean losing a job or a relationship or experiencing 



some other financial or emotional hardship. The positive aspect is that you find 
support from others in a similar position. These contacts may become good 
friends whom you may never have met in your usual circumstances. Consider 
new options, and you may discover another resource or approach that will help 
you see a way forward. 

However, this card often comes up in readings to show a fear of poverty and 
isolation, rather than actual poverty. It also commonly shows a fear of losing the 
security of home and/or the aftermath of a relationship breakup, with one partner 
feeling alone and depleted. It occasionally reveals the impact of bereavement. 
While tarot cards do not predict death, the Five of Pentacles when in the 
present/situation position in a reading (rather than the future position) can reflect 
the feelings of sadness as a result of losing someone close. 


REVERSED MEANING 

There’s a moral theme to the interpretation for the reversed Five of Pentacles, in 
that the card asks you to examine your values. If you’re clinging to objects, 
people, or money, what are you avoiding? Fear of change could lead you to 
ignore debt or become oblivious to growing tension in a relationship. Hoarding 
old possessions and memories shows you need to feel safe for now and don’t 
have the confidence or the faith that you will be supported in the future—at 
least, just at present. As with all minor arcana cards, though, this is a temporary 
influence. 

In relationships, you may suffer due to a partner’s selfish behavior. This 
person doesn’t want to give to you emotionally, or he or she withholds money. 
The card can also show you being ill-treated by an ex-partner who doesn’t pay 
what is due. 



SIX OF PENTACLES 



Element: Earth 

Astrological Association: Moon in Taurus 
Number: 6 

Tree of Life Position: Tiphareth, the sphere of beauty and rebirth 
Key Meaning: Property, family, inheritance 
































UNDERSTANDING THE SIX OF PENTACLES 


Like the figure of card XI, Justice, the young nobleman on the Six of Pentacles 
holds a pair of scales, and he is dressed in red, the color of energy and 
practicality. His mantle is purple, the color of intuition and spirituality—and a 
sign that he acts in good faith. He wears a blue-striped tunic—the only other 
Pentacle card with this stripe is the Nine, in which the woman shows one blue 
stripe beneath her robe. Both these cards share the virtue of generosity. Our 
nobleman is judicious, weighing the situation with the scales of mercy in his left 
hand and giving out coins with his right hand. 

The two figures kneeling before him are beggars. One is wounded, wearing 
sackcloth and a bandage around his head, the other, young and poor, his blue 
cloak bearing a patch. Because of his blue, we know he is experiencing true 
poverty and deserves help. The men exist in a barren place beyond the city walls 
and its greenery, and there is nothing to succor them. The white sky gives a 
feeling of uncertainty—it is not yellow and joyful, nor blue, for clarity—but this 
wealthy man gives money regardless of what the outcome might be. 

Six is the number of harmony and passivity. For the beggars, this is the ability 
to surrender and accept, which brings some serenity, even temporarily. The 
particular arrangement of the coin symbols might be a representation of the 
Hebrew letter Kaph on its side —Kaph means palm and what might be in the 
palm. On this card, the palms give and receive coins. Six also has the meaning of 
the past creating the present and future, so money earned or saved in the past 
may now be shared. 

The Tree of Life sphere associated with this card is Tiphareth, the sphere of 
beauty and rebirth, relating to the beauty of the generous soul. The Six of 
Pentacles has an astrological association with the Moon in Taurus, highlighting 
stability with sensitivity. This means being able to be generous without 
patronizing the recipient and also knowing how to receive help graciously. 


UPRIGHT MEANING 

The upright card shows that money is coming to you. It may arrive as a gift or an 
award and may be donated by an individual rather than an organization. This 
allows you to pay off any outstanding debt and/or invest the money wisely in 
your future. If you have been struggling financially, this card is a welcome sign 
that your circumstances will certainly improve. Equally, the card can show that 



you are the benefactor, so you may help a friend in need with a temporary cash¬ 
flow problem, or you feel drawn to support a charity that is close to your heart. 
Whomever you choose to help, you will consider carefully his or her needs and 
offer the right amount to make a difference. 

Overall, this card brings genuine support and predicts you feeling connected 
and close to your usual circle of friends and family. Together, you may be 
exchanging small gifts of appreciation. 

An additional meaning is receiving help or money from a person from your 
past or using savings to help another person. 


REVERSED MEANING 

When reversed, the Six of Pentacles shows money coming to you but you cannot 
keep it—usually due to carelessness or theft. A traditional meaning of the card is 
having your purse or wallet stolen, and this message is reinforced if the reversed 
card is placed close to the Seven of Swords, the “thief” card of the minor arcana 
(see page 88). Guard your possessions carefully and watch what you spend so 
that enough money stays in your pocket. The reversed card also suggests there 
may be envy due to money, so monitor your attitudes and the attitudes of people 
around you. 

An alternative interpretation is an offer of money, but it comes with 
conditions that are not acceptable to you. The message here is not to compromise 
and to say no if you need to. There will be other options. 



Element: Earth 

Astrological Association: Saturn in Taurus 
Number: 7 

Tree of Life Position: Netzach, the sphere of endurance, instinct, and desire 
Key Meanings: Work and the potential for success 














• -990 U S Oamn 
















UNDERSTANDING THE SEVEN OF PENTACLES 


The Seven of Pentacles is a card of potential success. A young man considers his 
treasure, six coins arranged on a vine and a seventh at his feet. This is the same 
vine we see on the “bounty” cards of this suit—the joyful Four of Pentacles, 
luxury-loving Nine, the established Ten, and the wealthy King (see pages 154, 
164, 166, and 174). Here, on the Seven of Pentacles, the vine is established, with 
large, healthy leaves—but there are no grapes. The plant is not mature enough 
yet to bear its full fruit. The man leans on his hoe, his magical object of 
transformation, as he painstakingly tends the land to nurture his vine. Slowly and 
with effort, it will bear him fruit. According to A. E. Waite, the creator of the 
Rider-Waite cards, “One would say that these are his treasures and that his heart 
was there.” The six coins on the tree show what must be saved for the future, and 
the single coin represents his disposable income, or what he can spend now on 
himself. This is small reward for now, but there is more to come, provided he 
can keep going and not rest too long contemplating his situation. 

Our grafter wears a tunic of red, to symbolize his energy, and blue, showing 
he is following his true purpose. His feet, like his vine, are firmly planted in the 
soil. He may be taking stock of his achievement as he gazes at his coins, but he 
will have to keep going if he is to see his ideas ripen and reward come. The 
purple mountains echo those on the Two and Three of Wands, and stand for 
goals and using our intuition. 

The card’s astrological association, Saturn in Taurus, means endeavor. The 
influence of the taskmaster planet Saturn leaves no room for fantastical plans 
and proposals—whatever you do must be grounded, organized, and nurtured 
with consistent effort. Netzach, the card’s Tree of Life sphere, stands for 
endurance, so the combined astrological and kabbalistic meaning of the card is 
long-term dedication. 

The card’s number is the mystical number seven. Seven is composed of three, 
the number of heaven, and four, the number of earth, so the challenge is to bring 
heaven down to earth—to makes your dreams reality (see VII, The Chariot, page 
xx). In the Seven of Pentacles, this reward comes from work, work, work—and 
keeping your eye on the prize. 


UPRIGHT MEANING 

There’s a goal in sight, and you are close to achieving it—but now is not the 


time to stop and reflect. The Seven of Pentacles is the card of doing, not 
philosophizing, so keep your focus on what you want and believe you can 
achieve it. This effort may feel relentless, but your hard work will pay off. 

The card often comes up in readings to show the need to keep the focus on 
your career goals or to work through a particularly tedious stage in a current 
project that leaves you feeling tired and deflated. You might be tired of the 
relentlessness of it all, but the reward will come as long as you don’t falter. Also, 
the Seven can show saving for a home or accruing funds and clients to expand a 
business. In domestic affairs, the Seven of Pentacles can show there’s not 
enough money left for the little luxuries that make all the effort of saving 
worthwhile. Whatever your situation, keep going—you are nearly there, and in 
the future, you will thank yourself for your dedication. 


REVERSED MEANING 

When reversed, the Seven of Pentacles means procrastination. Time is mnning 
out, so commit fully to the work you’re doing or the lifestyle you have, 
regardless of the ups and downs—or put your energies elsewhere. This may 
mean considering a different job or career path. You may have become 
disheartened with slow—or no—progress in your work or improvement in your 
finances, but while you’re in the doldrums, opportunities can slip away. Muster 
your willpower and take action now: Any decision is better than no decision at 
all. 

An additional meaning of the card is anxiety about a loan or other financial 
agreement. If this is affecting your motivation, try to renegotiate terms, rather 
than give up now. 




Element: Earth 

Astrological Association: Sun in Virgo 
Number: 8 

Tree of Life Position: Hod, the sphere of majesty and the mind 
Key Meanings: Education and achievement 

































UNDERSTANDING THE EIGHT OF PENTACLES 


The Eight of Pentacles depicts an apprentice at work. He is highly productive, 
and the tree, a symbol for growth, displays his creations—he works hard, and 
has eight coins to show for it. Dressed in blue and red, for energy and truth of 
purpose, he also wears a black apron, the vestment of a mason or smith. While 
the apron gives him practical protection during his work, the color black 
figuratively symbolizes protection, just like the merchant’s black cloak on the 
Four of Pentacles (see page 154). In the Eight, the apprentice’s budding 
knowledge and expertise will afford him protection from financial vulnerability 
in the future. A solid education and skill will equip him to earn the good living 
he deserves. While the atmosphere he works in is uncertain—the impassive 
gray-white sky gives no clue to future trends, unlike other cards with blue or 
sunny skies to set the tone—he keeps his head down regardless, attentive to his 
task. 

The city in the background is distant, so he may have made a conscious 
decision to study or work away from familiar comforts. He may have traveled 
for work away from home, which, while not a convenient choice, shows his 
ambition and dedication to walk his own path. 

The apprentice’s work is repetitive, doing the same job over and again until 
he has mastered his skill. He takes pride in his work. However, he could be 
overly perfectionist, as one coin seems to have been discarded and left on the 
floor, while the others are displayed. He has high standards and needs to achieve 
excellence at all times. This personality trait relates to the card’s astrological 
association of the Sun in Virgo. Virgoan qualities include attention to detail and 
practicality, but there is also a tendency toward self-criticism. The apprentice is 
analytic and mindful, linking with the card’s Tree of Life sphere, Hod. Its 
common meaning is majesty, and in this Eight of Pentacles refers to the mastery 
of the mind. 

The card’s number is eight, which stands for stability and renewal (see also 
card VIII, Strength, page 62). The eights in the minor arcana, as they are nearing 
the end of the numbered sequence, hold all our experiences up to that point. We 
have past knowledge to draw upon, which gives us wisdom and enables new 
choices—a time to renew our skills and find a fresh direction. 


UPRIGHT MEANING 


Money is on its way, often as a result of previous efforts or decisions rather than 
an unexpected bonus or gift. (Look to the Six or Ten of Pentacles for generosity 
and windfalls.) You may be offered an opportunity to gain new skills that will be 
profitable in the long term. You may also consider a new career direction or be 
working for promotion. In general, the card also reflects the need for a logical, 
diligent approach to your projects. 

This card is often known as the apprentice. It comes up in readings to show 
education and gaining a qualification, particularly an undergraduate degree or 
diploma. The Eight of Pentacles also shows a personality aspect, so if it appears 
in the “you/situation” position in a spread, it reveals a hardworking, trustworthy, 
and dedicated individual who takes his or her responsibilities seriously. 


REVERSED MEANING 

The reversed Eight of Pentacles can show that you’re feeling trapped. This may 
be because you’ve chosen an educational course that isn’t for you and doesn’t 
develop your particular talents or reflect your interests enough to be sustainable 
long term. In work, you may know you’re only doing the job for the money. 
While this may be acceptable on a short-term basis, long term it feels soul- 
destroying. While supporting yourself financially, it may be time to look 
elsewhere rather than let the situation continue. 

As a prediction card, the Eight of Pentacles shows a cycle is about to come to 
an end, so rather than wait for this to happen, conserve your energy and direct it 
toward finding a new career. Don’t resign yourself to your present situation if 
there’s no sense of achievement or appreciation. 



NINE OF PENTACLES 



Element: Earth 

Astrological Association: Venus in Virgo 
Number: 9 

Tree of Life Position: Yesod, the sphere of foundation and the unconscious 
mind 


Key Meanings: Comfort, accomplishment, and prosperity 


















• '990 US Games Systems Inc 




















UNDERSTANDING THE NINE OF PENTACLES 


The Nine of Pentacles is a card of comfort, luxury, and attainment. Here we have 
a country idyll—a manor house protected by hills and before us, a woman 
standing proud in her vineyard. These are grapes she has cultivated herself, 
shown by the two green loops holding the vines to wooden supports on the right 
of the card. In this rich and plentiful land, the lady of the house tends her nine 
coins and lays her right hand over one coin protectively. Her treasure might 
remind us of hay bales, harvested and piled in summer fields, their circular ends 
stacked like the faces of coins. Note that the piles of coins are unequal: She 
keeps six to her right and three to her left. Those on her right feel like hers to 
keep, while those on the left might be coins to give away. By ensuring she gives 
away less than she receives, she will maintain her standard of living. 

Her hat is red, for passion and energy, and the lining of her gown is also red. 
This red lining offers a connection with the womb and its implicit fertility. This 
woman is fertile in her thoughts and tends her garden with the utmost love and 
care. The flower symbol on her robe is similar in form to the glyph of Venus, for 
her ruling planet, also the symbol for the female. 

The small bird on her gauntlet is curious—its head is covered with a red 
hood, showing that it is temporarily tamed; wild instincts are under control. 
Although birds are often symbols of spirit, when domesticated or restrained, they 
can also signify vanity. Because the bird is temporarily hooded (rather than 
chained or caged), we sense that this woman is alert to the dangers of using 
money to exert control. She guards against materialism and egotism. Her 
kabbalistic and astrological associations account for this level of self-awareness. 
Luxury-loving, passionate Venus is tempered by Virgo’s conservatism and 
attention to detail. The card’s Tree of Life sphere, Yesod, means foundation. 
Yesod is associated with the Moon, ruler of the unconscious mind. 

The card’s number is nine, or three sets of three. Three is a dynamic number, 
and when multiplied by itself, symbolizes intense productivity. It also holds the 
message of the three aspects of the goddess (maiden, mother, and crone), as well 
as the integration of mind, body, and spirit. In the Nine of Pentacles, this can 
show that the lady’s financial security feeds her mentally and spiritually, 
allowing her to live abundantly and give generously to others. 


UPRIGHT MEANING 



The Nine ushers in a time of financial stability. You can feel safe in your home 
and proud of your achievements. At last, you can surround yourself with the 
material objects you love, and you may find yourself redecorating your home or 
tending your garden or yard. It’s time to appreciate all that you have, so leisure 
time beckons; treat yourself to whatever makes you happy and enjoy the fruits of 
your work. You will be able to focus on your own needs without feeling guilty. 
The Nine also brings a sense of serenity and relaxation, so the card predicts you 
can feel at home, and at one, with yourself. 

This card often comes up in a reading to show a woman of independent 
means who is generous and well balanced. In this way, the Nine of Pentacles is 
similar to the Queen of Pentacles (see page 172), although the Queen’s influence 
is generally greater. In work matters, the card can predict financial reward, such 
as a bonus, for your efforts. 


REVERSED MEANING 

When reversed, the card can show vanity and ego at large—the urge for material 
wealth gets out of control, so overspending (or dealing with a loved one’s 
overspending) may need to be confronted. In general, the card can show 
financial dependence that is uncomfortable or misuse of money for selfish 
means. 

An additional meaning is feeling that your home is somehow under threat 
because you are struggling with debt. Don’t struggle alone—help is at hand. 


TEN OF PENTACLES 



Element: Earth 

Astrological Association: Mercury in Virgo 
Number: 10 

Tree of Life Position: Malkuth, the Kingdom, the sphere of experience 
Key Meanings: Property, family, and inheritance 





















































UNDERSTANDING THE TEN OF PENTACLES 


A happy couple and their dogs face each other under an archway, the formal 
entrance to a prosperous home. We spy a house in a walled courtyard, and there 
is a prominent high tower—possibly an obvious sexual symbol to show a love 
relationship or a signifier for the traditional, learning, and protection. 

An older man looks on, seated in a thronelike chair. He is the King of 
Pentacles grown old, now with white hair, but still wearing his grapevine cloak 
(see page 174). By his presence alone, he appears to give the pair his blessing; it 
is now their turn to inherit the values of the family through marriage. We see 
three generations here, the grandfather-king, his son or daughter and their 
beloved, and a small child, presumably theirs or the offspring of another relative. 
Each generation seems quite separate from one another, but they happily share 
the same space. 

All is in perfect balance. The ten coins on the card are symmetrical and 
represent the Tree of Life. The four elements are represented, too, equally. We 
see watery scenes on the coats of arms on the bridge; for the Earth element, there 
are grapevines; the woman’s cloak is red, for Fire: and the sky over the bridge 
gives us the element of Air. All four elements exist in harmony. 

In numerology, ten represents completeness and perfection. In the Ten of 
Pentacles, this shows happy stability, emotionally and financially. The ten coins 
are laid out in the shape of the kabalistic Tree of Life (see page 234)— each one 
representing a sphere on the tree and each sphere having an esoteric concept. 

The whole tree links with the card’s meaning of maturity and completeness. The 
individual sphere associated with this card is Malkuth, for kingdom—so the Ten 
of Pentacles celebrates our personal kingdom or our material world. 

The Ten’s astrological association of Mercury in Virgo highlights practical 
affairs as well as the physical body. This combination also shows the ability to 
find specific solutions to problems. 


UPRIGHT MEANING 

The upright Ten of Pentacles shows an inheritance, generosity, and a love 
relationship that brings wealth and happiness—so if you are asking the question, 
“Will my current relationship get more committed?” the answer will be a 
resounding yes. The Ten of Pentacles often comes up in readings to show a 
wedding. What is even better is that the couple shares similar values and often 


has similar cultural backgrounds (and the two families actually like one 
another!). 

An additional meaning is inherited property, buying a second home, or 
extending your current home, again with family support. At this time, you also 
benefit from sharing—your time, resources, skills, or money to help each other 
out. Note that family in this context signifies those you consider family and treat 
as such, so this could relate to a close circle of longtime friends. 

This card also suggests maturity. You can interpret this in financial terms, 
with investments maturing, as well as in emotional terms, as the emotional 
maturity that comes with life experience. You may find that an older person in 
the family has wisdom to share in addition to resources. 


REVERSED MEANING 

When reversed, the Ten of Pentacles reveals communication problems in 
families as one generation tries to dominate another; children and parents 
disagree and have very different attitudes. The card can highlight contention 
over a specific issue, such as conflict over property or money. Equally, general 
attitudes toward finances may be at the heart of the problem. This card often 
comes up in readings to show overly strict parents who try to control their 
families with money. 

There is also an issue with status here as traditional values block freedom of 
expression. Older people may find it hard to accept that their children want to do 
things differently. 

In romantic relationships, money, property issues, and the demands of family 
get in the way of love. Ambition takes over; personal life comes second. 





Element: Earth of the suit of Earth 

Key Meanings: Talent shines and money news 




























UNDERSTANDING THE PAGE OF PENTACLES 


Unlike the wary Page of Swords, the Page of Pentacles is entirely absorbed in 
his coin rather than in his surroundings. He holds the money lightly, like a 
precious object, a gift that will become an accolade, an award for his talents. 

Around him are low mountains, ploughed fields, grass, and trees—a 
landscape of plenty—and this fertile place of possibility is his natural home. 
Four trees in the distance tell us that his good fortune has come from seeds he 
diligently tended. He can admire his coin in the knowledge that he will always 
be supported: Turning his attention to one issue does not mean any other life 
aspect will suffer, and he does not need to look over his shoulder for challengers 
hoping for a share of his glory. In this way, the Page is the opposite of poverty 
consciousness. With his youthful optimism, he assumes he will always have 
everything he needs. 

The Page’s red headgear stands for energy and passion. His scarf is draped 
over his shoulder and extends down his back, signifying his wholehearted 
motivation. The yellow background and coin symbolize the intellect and solar 
consciousness: this Page is proud to let his light shine. 

Earth of Earth is the Page’s elemental association. What he achieves comes 
from the ground up, like the card’s trees, with solid roots and foundation. He 
begins with a solid plan and an aim to establish something great. As double 
Earth, he may not be idealistic, but he is practical, sees through his ideas, and is 
loyal to his purpose. 

Pages and Knights in tarot are generally regarded as people or influences, 
whereas the other court cards (the Queens and Kings) are assumed to be people. 
Let your intuition guide you toward the most appropriate meaning for the Page 
in a reading by working with the card’s imagery first, then the written 
interpretations here (see also the Introduction, page 8). 


UPRIGHT MEANING 

As an influence: This Page reveals progress and adventure, as well as 
auspicious beginnings. This is a time to nurture your skills and abilities. There 
will be good news concerning finances, business, education, and travel. The 
Page of Pentacles also highlights the need for management, and in work matters, 
there may be an opportunity to manage people and projects. This Page often 
appears to show a job offer or an offer made on a property. 


The card does come with an element of caution, however: There is a real need 
for attention to detail now and for diligence in all practical affairs, so double¬ 
check all arrangements and agreements. Also, check through your personal 
schedule to ensure everything you plan is realistic. The Page of Pentacles can 
also be a sign that it’s time to attend to finances; he comes up in readings to 
nudge us to do our taxes and renew outstanding insurance policies. 

As a person: Hardworking and methodical, reliable and dedicated—this Page 
is practical and trustworthy. As a Page he is a younger person, or someone with 
youthful vigor. He may be starting out in the world, or in a new line of business. 
He may not have money now, but he has the potential to achieve great things in 
future, so you can believe in him and his plans; he will succeed, and he will not 
give up. 

The card can also show a young person’s achievement and reward for his or 
her efforts in sport or education. 

As the “you” card in a reading: Money and opportunities beckon—you 
have an opportunity to establish a new venture. 

As an influence: If two or more Pages fall close together in a reading, the 
meanings are as follows: 

& Two Pages: Friendship if upright; rivalry if one or both cards are reversed 

Three Pages: Lots of social activities 
& Four Pages: A social group of young people 


REVERSED MEANING 

When the Page of Pentacles is reversed, there may be unwelcome news 
regarding finances or property. Unlike the responsible upright Page, the card in 
this position means extravagance and irresponsibility rule. You may suffer due to 
someone else’s selfish actions. This may apply to young people you live with or 
to friends with immature tendencies. 

The card can also apply to a person with a sense of entitlement who helps 
himself to what is yours; while this is not necessarily theft, it is underhanded. 
Observe and take note for future reference. 



Element: Fire of the suit of Earth 
Astrological Associations: Leo and Virgo 
Key Meaning: Improving prosperity 

















KNIGHT.* PENTACLES 


• 1990US GmtS*iXmi Me 















UNDERSTANDING THE KNIGHT OF PENTACLES 


This is the only Knight of the tarot’s four minor suits whose horse is at rest, 
which seems at odds with the usual mission of a Knight, galloping boldly 
onward to fulfill a quest. The steed of the Knight of Pentacles—built more for 
pulling a plough than raging into battle—symbolizes a measured approach, very 
unlike that of the dashing Knight of Swords, who rushes headlong toward his 
goal. This Knight’s mission is long term; he has no interest in hasty action and 
will work hard and long to ensure his success. 

The plumes on the horse bridle and the Knight’s helmet are green, the color of 
nature. They resemble a cluster of oak leaves, a reminder of the idiom “From 
acorns great oaks come.” This gives us the meaning of investment for the future, 
a concept supported by the fields of rich terracotta soil; the time is right for 
sowing, and we might even imagine the Knight planting his coin in those 
furrows and waiting for money trees to grow. 

The Knight of Pentacles is methodical and thinks ahead; he is fully prepared 
for his journey. The blanket under the saddle shows that he has equipped his 
horse for the discomfort of a long day’s ride, and behind the saddle is a black 
book; he’s brought something to read during rest periods or perhaps it is a 
notebook in which to record his progress. The card’s element is Fire of the suit 
of Earth, and for this reason, the Knight of Pentacles has the ingredients of 
steady purpose—Fire energy to drive him forwards and Earth energy to help him 
plan and rationalize his ideas. 

The Knight holds his coin in his right hand, which is the same color yellow as 
the sky. Like the Page of Pentacles, he sees potential prosperity all around him. 
His coin is not hidden, and he is clear that financial security is his central 
concern. The red of his tunic and the horse’s bridles show he has energy, and like 
the other minor Knights, his blue armor shows he is true to his purpose. 

Knights and Pages in tarot are generally regarded as people or influences, 
whereas the other court cards (the Queens and Kings) are assumed to be people. 
Let your intuition guide you toward the most appropriate meaning for the Knight 
in a reading by working with the card’s imagery first, then the written 
interpretations here (see also the Introduction, page 8). 


UPRIGHT MEANING 

As an influence: Showing financial growth and good investment, this card 



means plans concerning property progress. With strategizing and setting a 
realistic goal, you will succeed. Pay attention to the practical details now, and 
future benefits are assured. Day to day, this Knight asks you to get through 
boring and routine, but essential, tasks. In work, the card can indicate more 
money coming to you due to a raise, bonus, or promotion, but you may need to 
work harder in return. 

An additional meaning of the card is finding a secure home, potentially with a 
partner. 

As a person: This Knight is loyal and dependable. He is a natural protector, 
and security is very important to him. He may work in property or finance. 

As a potential partner, he has much to offer and is genuine. For some, he may 
lack excitement, as he plans rather than reacts; he can be slow to judge and to 
express his feelings, and keeps on safe subjects. Depending on what you need 
from a relationship, he could be a gift—your rock through thick and thin. If you 
crave excitement, he won’t be entertaining enough to capture your heart 

As the “you” card in a reading: Invest your time wisely. Be consistent in 
your efforts. 

As an influence: If two or more Knights fall close together in a reading, the 
meanings are as follows: 

& Two Knights: Friendship if upright; rivalry if one or both cards are reversed 

Three Knights: Men meeting up 
& Four Knights: Lots of action; events speed up 


REVERSED MEANING 

When reversed, the card advises that you avoid complacency and check out all 
financial arrangements. The most negative interpretation of the card is financial 
mismanagement and misleading advice. 

As a person, the reversed knight is stubborn and cannot see others’ 
viewpoints. He is plodding and pessimistic, reluctant to take action and 
unwilling to go beyond his comfort zone. He may tend to be materialistic and 
secretive and, in extremis, dishonest. 



OUEEN OF PENTACLES 



Element: Water of the suit of Earth 

Astrological Associations: Sagittarius and Capricorn 

Chakras: Base and solar plexus, for security (earthiness) and wisdom 

Key Meaning: A reliable woman 


















SO 0661 • 
















UNDERSTANDING THE QUEEN OF PENTACLES 

The Queen of Pentacles is an aspect of card III, The Empress, or mother 
archetype. The Queen of Cups is the heart, the Queen of Swords, the mind, and 
the Queen of Wands, the soul (see pages 144, 200, 228, and III, The Empress, 
page 43). Our Queen of Pentacles is the physical, or material, side of the mother 
—the aspect that deals with money, property, and practical concerns to make our 
lives secure. 

This Queen looks down upon her golden coin and to the earth itself, Earth 
being her suit element. All around her are symbols of spring and fertility—the 
hare, lush vegetation, flowing water, and flowers. The rose briar is also seen on 
card VIII, Strength, and I, The Magician—which also shares the dominant colors 
of red and yellow for practicality and clear sightedness. The land is part 
cultivated and part wild, giving the sense that work is ongoing and that the 
Queen is comfortable in nature and in the domain of her own garden or yard. She 
is pragmatic, cares for her environment, and above all, works hard to achieve 
long-term success. She is patient and will wait to see the fruit of her labor. 

Engraved on the Queen’s throne are pears. Symbols of fertility and long life, 
pears were sacred to the Italian deity Pomona, goddess of fruit trees and the 
orchard. According to Ovid, Pomona was a wood nymph—which the Rider- 
Waite deck’s artist, Pamela Colman Smith, may well have referenced in the 
carving of a nymph on the right of the throne. The goat’s head is the symbol for 
Capricorn, one of the Queen’s zodiac signs, mirrored as a winged goat on the 
crest of her crown. The goat also appears on card XV, The Devil, and is a symbol 
of excess that, in the case of the Queen of Pentacles, translates as sensuality. 

The card’s element combination is Water of Earth. As water feeds earth and 
makes crops grow, this underlines the Queen’s association with fertility and 
plenty. 

Queens and Kings in tarot are traditionally regarded as people in your life or 
people about to come into your orbit. However, you can also read the Queen as a 
general influence, so this interpretation is included last. 


UPRIGHT MEANING 

As a person: The Queen of Pentacles is usually well off, generous, and 
supportive. She has a strong maternal instinct, is affectionate and wise—and she 
may be an older woman, or a younger female with wisdom beyond her years. 


Her vocations include public office, ecology, agriculture, politics, sports 
coaching, food and catering, and business—any work that benefits large 
numbers of people. She may be a homemaker, as she loves caring for her home 
and garden. She likes the good things in life and knows how to spend money 
well—on beautiful objects, on gifts for loved ones, and of course, on herself. She 
is physically affectionate and hands-on in her projects; rather than dictating from 
the sidelines, she will lend practical help. 

In readings, she commonly shows up as a benefactor. 

As the “you” card in a reading: Care for your body and your finances. 

As an influence: In addition to practical support, wisdom, good financial 
management, and financial help, the Queen of Pentacles can show marriage and 
money coming to a couple. It is also a positive card for good health, a sensual 
sex life, fertility, and children. 

If two or more Queens fall close together in a reading, the meanings are as 
follows: 

Two Queens: Rivalry 
"S" Three Queens: Helpful friends 
& Four Queens: Women meeting up 


REVERSED MEANING 

When this card is reversed, finances can suffer. Money you relied upon doesn’t 
roll in or funds are misappropriated. You may have to deal with the impact of 
someone’s financial mishaps. This is temporary, however. An additional 
meaning is your home is neglected while other concerns take over. 

As a person, the reversed Queen can be stubborn and unimaginative. She can 
be mean with money, or at the other extreme, an emotional spender. Her erratic 
behavior is for self-comfort, or she uses money to buy other people’s affection. 



Element: Air of the suit of Earth 
Astrological Associations: Aries and Taurus 
Chakras: Solar plexus and base, for wisdom and security 
Key Meaning: A generous man 
















• i*» U S G*m« SyWwnv We 












UNDERSTANDING THE KING OF PENTACLES 


The King of Pentacles is an aspect of card IV, The Emperor, or father archetype, 
who brings structure, order, and authority. The King of Pentacles is the father- 
aspect that deals with money, property, and practical concerns to make our lives 
secure. 

The four bulls’ heads on the King’s throne stand for Aries, one of his zodiac 
signs, and the number four relates to his ancestor card, IV, The Emperor (see 
page 46), and also symbolizes the four elements. The King has his right foot on 
the head of a boar to show his mastery over base instincts. His foot and leg are 
armored, to symbolize he has fought hard for his position. This is echoed in the 
victory wreath under his crown, which is decorated with red flowers and fleurs- 
de-lis, three-petaled lilies or irises, ancient Egyptian fertility symbols. In this 
way, the King presides over the fruits of the Earth—the element of his suit. 

The grapes and bull imagery also invite a comparison with the ancient legend 
of Ampelos, a young satyr loved by the Greek god of wine, Dionysus. Ampelos 
was savaged by a wild bull and died. Then Dionysus turned Ampelos’s corpse 
into a grapevine and his blood into wine. On the card, vines grow plentifully 
around the bulls on the throne of the King of Pentacles and creep onto his robes 
as a pattern of leaves and red grapes—symbols of fruitfulness and success. From 
this, we deduce that the King plans carefully and expects results from long-term 
investments. 

He holds a scepter in his right hand and his precious coin in his left, which 
rests on his knee. He is protected by a stone wall, and it seems he is stationed 
within castle battlements, as we can see the castle keep and towers on the right 
of the card. We sense he is secure and protected. The background is golden and 
orange, like his coin, reminiscent of late summer sky and harvest time, a symbol 
of abundance. The King’s cowl is red, for energy and the material world; he does 
not rest on his laurels. 

The card’s element is Air of Earth, which can be interpreted as grounded 
ideas—the King sees through the projects he begins. Air and Earth can also be 
thought of as seeds borne on the wind to impregnate the earth, relating to the 
King’s meaning of fertility and foundation for future growth. 

Kings and Queens in tarot are traditionally regarded as people in your life or 
people about to come into your orbit. However, you can also read the King as a 
general influence, so this interpretation is included last. 


UPRIGHT MEANING 


As a person: A visionary man with a plan, the King will work hard for rewards 
and is usually well off. He is reliable and generous and offers practical support. 
Security is important to him, and he is happiest in a settled relationship. He 
needs to be a protector, and he has firm boundaries—he will not tolerate those 
looking to take what is his. His ideal vocations include property and building, 
business, accounting or any work that is number-based, as well as agriculture or 
land management. 

An additional meaning is a generous benefactor. 

As the “you” card in a reading: Make the most of your assets. 

As an influence: Financial and property matters improve, and you enjoy 
success and comfort. The King of Pentacles also predicts conflicts that will be 
resolved. In relationships, he offers security and loyalty. 

If two or more Kings fall close together in a reading, the meanings are as 
follows: 

Two Kings: A good partnership 

Three Kings: Influential men 
& Four Kings: A power battle 


REVERSED MEANING 

When reversed, the King is greedy and untrustworthy, so double-check all 
financial agreements to ensure that there are no hidden catches. Debt is an 
interpretation of the reversed King, so turn the spotlight on your finances now to 
limit the damage of overspending. 

As a person, the reversed King is corrupt and may be involved in fraud or 
gambling. He is determined to win at any cost. 


The Suit of Swords 

ACE OF SWORDS 



Element: Air 

Astrological Association: The Air signs—Gemini, Libra, and Aquarius 

Number: 1 

Tree of Life Position: Kether, the sphere of divine light 
Key Meanings: Success, decisions, and beginnings 




















AC E 4-SWORD S, 


• 1990 U S 














UNDERSTANDING THE ACE OF SWORDS 


A hand appears from a cloud, offering an upright sword. Circled with a crown, 
the image is a symbol for the card’s Tree of Life sphere, Kether, for divine light, 
also traditionally titled as “the crown.” Hanging from the crown are a frond of 
fern and a sprig of mistletoe and berries. As both plants can attach themselves to 
trees, the sword here becomes the tree, a symbol of everlasting strength. Above 
the sword hilt are six golden leaves, similar to those on the Ace of Wands (see 
page 207). The number six corresponds to Zain, the sixth letter of the Hebrew 
alphabet; its symbol is the sword. The six also links with card VI, The Lovers, 
for decisions—the sword’s action is nothing other than decisive. 

The scene beneath the sword shows blue-and-purple mountains, symbols of 
spiritual truths and goals. While there are no dwellings or green pastures to muse 
upon, growth is symbolized on the crown itself, with the mistletoe and fern, 
signifying the fertility of the mind; the sword therefore offers us the gift of 
intelligence (linking with the card’s element of Air, for the mental realm) and 
because it is held upright in victory, a second gift of success. As with the other 
Ace cards and their symbols, in the Ace of Swords, the sword is offered with the 
right hand, the hand of giving (as opposed to the left hand, which is the receiving 
hand). 

Aces offer the pure energy of their suits. As number ones, they represent 
oneness with the divine spirit or God. Indivisible, their energy is singular, strong, 
and purposeful. They all represent beginnings, impulses, and new possibilities, 
in the most pure and obvious form. In this Ace, the sword we see is double- 
edged—in cutting to the truth, it can defend us or turn against us. The sword is 
certain and strong; A. E. Waite, the creator of the Rider-Waite deck, describes 
the Ace of Swords as “the triumph of force.” As the swords are part of battle, the 
Ace does not come without potential conflict. 


UPRIGHT MEANING 

The upright meaning of the Ace is auspicious for every aspect of your life. In a 
spread, it overrules any negative minor arcana cards close by (just like the major 
arcana card XIX, The Sun). The Ace of Swords predicts new beginnings, 
decisions, and clear thinking and usually relates to work and love. It heralds 
action, drama, and sometimes confrontation. However the Ace of Swords 
manifests in your life, it will bring an immediate change to your circumstances 
—for the better. 


As a prediction card, it shows that mental agility and assertiveness will bring 
success. The other cards around the Ace in a reading will guide you to nature of 
this conquest. Be cautious, though, not to be too zealous—judge the situation 
and be direct, rather than abrasive, mindful of how you would want to be treated 
if you were on the receiving end. 

In relationships, it reveals triumph over past obstacles—you win through to 
your heart’s desire. 

In a reading, one Ace brings a focus on the life area according to the suit, 
which can set the theme of the reading. If two or more Aces appear near each 
other in a reading, it means the following: 

& Two Aces: An important partnership 
Three Aces: Good news 

& Four Aces: Excitement, beginnings, and potential 


REVERSED MEANING 

When the Ace reverses, the card can predict conflict and arguments, and you 
may become involved in a hurtful battle of wills. The card can also predict a 
contest that you cannot win, at least at present. The message is to withdraw, tend 
your wounds, and turn your attentions elsewhere. 

You may also lack confidence in your intellectual abilities just now and not 
feel equal to others—which is your perception, not the reality. 

Another common meaning of the reversed Ace in readings is a decision going 
against you, such as failing a test or interview and, in more general terms, not 
being able to hold your ground under fire from more dominant personalities. 



Element: Air 

Astrological Association: Moon in Libra 
Number: 2 

Tree of Life Position: Chockmah, the sphere of wisdom 
Key Meanings: Time to think and a stalemate 

















• 1990 U S Game* 

















UNDERSTANDING THE TWO OF SWORDS 


Alone woman holds two swords across her chest in a pose of self-defense. She 
appears to be resting from a duel and protects her heart with her weapons, as if 
fearful that the pain of the Three of Swords, with its pierced heart, may come. 
Although blindfolded like the maiden on the Eight of Swords, unlike that 
woman, she has taken herself to a safe space. Seated on high ground, this is her 
place of contemplation. Her pale robe is monastic in style, which tell us she is 
taking time out from the world and keeping her thoughts to herself. The rocks, 
partly submerged, symbolize issues yet to surface fully; but they do exist—they 
are part of her landscape and will not go away. Her hair is parted so that the third 
eye, between the brows, is visible. Temporarily deprived of sight, she “sees” 
with her intuition. The sky, graduating from gray to twilight blue, reflects a 
changing emotional landscape: She is in two minds, also signified by the two 
swords. 

The figure’s position—facing us, sitting squarely on a stone plinth, and 
holding swords—reminds us of card IX, Justice. Traditional representations of 
Justice in art and sculpture show this virtue personified as a blindfolded female 
holding the sword of justice in one hand and the scales of mercy in the other. 
Similarly, our Two of Swords woman must also adjudicate, but in the sphere of 
her own affairs. 

The card’s Tree of Life sphere is Chockmah, which means wisdom and links 
with the figure’s exposed third eye. She must use her knowledge and experience 
to make the right decision, to choose between two possibilities. There’s a further 
duality in the Tree of Life and the card’s astrological associations. Chockmah 
represents the male principle, or yang, as opposed to the yin, or feminine 
qualities of the Moon in the card’s astrological profile of the Moon in Libra. The 
moon, celestial body of the subconscious, joins balanced Libra. This 
combination reveals a tendency to keep the peace rather than act. We see a 
crescent moon on this Two of Swords, which echoes the moon on card II, The 
High Priestess, the psychic who symbolizes the divine feminine. 

The waxing moon we see on the top right of the card is in its growth phase 
and will change shape throughout its cycle, just as our blindfolded woman goes 
through the process of decision-making, weighing up alternative outcomes. 


UPRIGHT MEANING 



The Two of Swords shows thinking time before a decision. A situation has 
reached a stalemate, so you can view this period as a truce or a rest before 
further negotiation. The tendency is to protect yourself, have a little peace, and 
not take action. Unfortunately, this upcoming battle may not go away; resolve it 
now and it’s done. Otherwise, the situation festers and may return. 

As there are two swords on the card, this Two can reveal a person you cross 
swords with. It’s likely that your difficult person is sharp-tongued, but don’t be 
afraid of a lashing: Stand your ground and say what you think. 

The card commonly comes up in readings to show employment issues and 
also time out in relationships. This may be circumstantial, due to partners living 
in different places; if negative cards such as the Three of Swords or Lovers 
reversed appears with the Two of Swords, it shows making a decision about the 
future of a relationship. 

Whatever your experience of the Two of Swords, help is at hand in the form 
of supportive friends and colleagues. Listen to advice and then take the best 
practical steps forward. 


REVERSED MEANING 

When reversed, the traditional meaning of the Two of Swords is deception and 
being blind to someone’s manipulation. This card applies particularly to 
partnerships—love, friendships, and in business and your career. If you intuition 
is telling you that someone is dishonest, pay attention and carry out your own 
detailed investigation to get to the heart of the matter. There is an opportunity 
here to act, but the timing is sensitive; the message is not to delay. 




Element: Air 

Astrological Association: Saturn in Libra 
Number: 3 

Tree of Life Position: Binah, the sphere of understanding 
Key Meanings: Sorrow, heartbreak, and pain 
















s n omi > 











UNDERSTANDING THE THREE OF SWORDS 


The Three of Swords shows clouds, rain, and three swords plunged into a heart 
—to the left, to the right, and through the center. The heart is large and the 
swords smaller, and the effect is that of a heraldic shield, a defensive device that 
has been penetrated. The rain echoes the action of the swords, like headless 
arrows striking through the gray sky. What is unexpected in this sad card is the 
subtle blue sheen on the lower parts of the sword shafts, which appear at the 
bottom of the heart motif. Blue stands for truth—and the swords pierce to the 
truth, whatever the situation; in cruelty lies some kindness. Perhaps, after all is 
said and done, a blue sky awaits, a brighter outlook for the future. 

This is one of two minor arcana cards without people (the other is the Eight of 
Wands), so there is no obvious action to interpret. This is intentional, in that the 
sole focus is the impact of the swords, giving the cards its primary meaning of 
pain. As creator of this deck A. E. Waite says, the card represents “all that the 
design signifies naturally, being too simple and obvious to call for specific 
enumeration.” 

Swords are of the suit of Air, but here we are dealing with emotional pain, so 
there is an element of Cups or Water for emotions here too. The swords lend 
drama to the situation, but the pain is very much in the heart rather than the head. 
The card’s Tree of Life sphere, Binah, means understanding and compassion and 
represents the female principle of reception. In this sense, there is little we can 
do but accept the pain and surrender to it. 

In numerology, three is a dynamic number (see also card III, The Empress, 
page 42). It symbolizes the trinity of mind, body, and soul—which, 
unfortunately, may all be affected when we experience deep disappointment or 
betrayal. The three can also be interpreted as three people in a relationship, 
which gives the card one of its meanings of affairs. This reflects old versions of 
major arcana card III, The Lovers (see The Historical Lovers, page 56), in which 
three people were shown on the card; a man had to choose between two lovers, 
hence once of its meanings of decisions and affairs of the heart. 

The Three of Swords has an astrological association with Saturn in Libra. 
Saturn’s influence is harsh and demands the truth, whereas Libra likes balance, 
like the sign’s symbols of the scales. However, Saturn is more powerful in this 
combination, so the truth will come out—no matter how much it hurts. In the 
card’s image, the swords cut right through to the heart of the matter. 


UPRIGHT MEANING 


The upright meaning of the Three of Swords is direct in its meaning and reveals 
the pain of truth. The clouds of doubt are cleared, and you can do nothing but 
face reality. This is a common card for relationship betrayal and can denote 
affairs or disloyalty in other life areas, such as work relationships and business 
dealings. On a more positive note, you do get right to the heart of the matter— 
any confusion is banished, and you are now in a position to begin to move on 
from shock, to begin the healing process and move forward. 

In health, this Three can relate to heart issues that may need attention—such 
as blood pressure issues, circulatory problems, conditions such as agina, and 
very occasionally, the need for surgery. Please note that this is a message to take 
care of the heart and safeguard health; it is not a prediction of serious illness. 


REVERSED MEANING 

When the Three of Swords reverses, the upset of the upright card is accompanied 
by quarrels and drama. In a sense, despite the upheaval, this gives a more 
positive meaning than that of the upright card, as at least feelings are expressed 
and some of the confusion and pain is shared and released. Those around you 
will understand your need to vent. 



FOUR OF SWORDS 


Element: Air 

Astrological Association: Jupiter in Libra 
Number: 4 

Tree of Life Position: Chesed, the sphere of love 
Key Meanings: Rest, passivity, and quiet time 








































snout • 


































































UNDERSTANDING THE FOUR OF SWORDS 


Exisiting as it does between the Three, the card of strife, and the Five, the 
“battle” card, the Four of Swords offers welcome rest: an opportunity to recover 
from the stress and betrayal of the Three before the onslaught of the Five. The 
knight shown in this card has temporarily laid down his tools; one sword is 
displayed lengthwise, the hilt aligning with his head, in the sculpture as part of 
the tomb, to signify his identity as a warrior. The other three swords hang above 
him, secured on the wall, ready for him to take up when he rises. But for now, 
the knight is at rest, safe from attack and the demands of assault. 

The stained-glass window symbolizes the world being held at a distance 
during the knight’s period of withdrawal. The figures in the stained glass suggest 
a monk helping a child or devotee, embodying the medieval knight’s 
commitment to charity. This is echoed in the knight’s code of chivalry, which 
commits “to give succor to widows and orphans,” and hints at the two beggars 
on the Five of Pentacles (see page 156) who are also depicted below a stained- 
glass window, another world they cannot see and are not part of. 

The stone knight is similar to those in the twelfth-century Templar Church in 
Fondon, which was built by the Knights Templar, an order of charitable knights 
in the Middle Ages who were powerful protectors of Christianity. The knight on 
the card could be Baron Robert de Roos (1177-1226/27), as the hands of his 
effigy at Templar Church, unlike the other eight effigies displayed there, are 
placed in prayer position like those of the knight on the Four of Swords. De 
Roos took a year out to become a monk and relinquished his lands, so the monk 
depicted in the stained-glass window may also in fact be De Roos himself. 

Number four is the number of stability and balance. In the warring suit of 
Swords, it denotes ceasefire; there is no need to continue a conflict. In the 
kabbalistic Tree of Fife, the card links with Chesed, the sphere of love. This is 
love in the broadest sense, encompassing gentleness, harmony, and peace—just 
what the resting knight needs. 

Astrologically, the Four of Swords is linked to the planet Jupiter in the sign of 
Fibra. Jupiter indicates philosophy and possible solitude. Fibra, however, is a 
sociable sign, so we have the conflicting qualities of the lone thinker with the 
socialite. In this way, perhaps the astrological association tells a story of the 
knight stepping away from his comrades to spend time at rest in contemplation, 
taking on the life of a monk in the church in which he takes sanctuary. 


UPRIGHT MEANING 


The Four of Swords has the meaning of time out, so you may be taking a rest 
from work, a personal project, or a relationship. The card often comes up in 
readings in the past or present position to show taking a break from a 
relationship and also the need for recovery from illness or an operation. 
Commonly, as a prediction card, the Four of Swords shows recovery from stress, 
so the message is to conserve your energy and take quiet time if you can. 

The solitude of the Four of Swords can also apply to meditators and 
lightworkers and any individual following a spiritual path. You may need more 
mental space and private time than usual, so in this sense, the card is a nudge to 
take some alone to recharge. 

An additional meaning of the card is counseling or therapy and, rarely, 
attending a memorial service. 


REVERSED MEANING 

When the Four of Swords reverses, the time-out message is enforced—so you 
may have to take time away from work or other responsibilities due to influences 
out of your control. Unfortunately, there is little you can do to alter this situation, 
so you must surrender to events. This is a phase, and the message is to find 
peace. Use the time positively. You may need to rethink your working 
arrangements or come to terms with changes in a relationship, particularly if you 
live apart from a partner or potential love. 



FIVE OF SWORDS 


Element: Air 

Astrological Association: Venus in Aquarius 
Number: 5 

Tree of Life Position: Geburah, the sphere of power 
Key Meanings: Upheaval, conflict, and loss 














*•'*'*£> snout * 









UNDERSTANDING THE FIVE OF SWORDS 


The Five of Swords shows a young man holding three swords, two hoisted 
proudly at his shoulder and one held downward, by the hilt, as if to stake his 
territory. Two swords are cast down on the beach, surrendered by the retreating 
figures. Rather than having dignity in victory, however, the young man appears 
to be grinning, perhaps taking sadistic pleasure in his opponents’ defeat. The 
defeated figures have their backs to us, unable to face their challenger again, and 
the one on the right has his hands to his face in shame. The clouds tell the story 
of the conflict that has just ended—they are gray and slashed, like torn fabric. 

The youth wears red, for energy and vitality, and green, the color of nature. 
First, this tells us about his personality: Red reflects his energy and ego, and 
green, his sense of natural entitlement—not just to take his challengers’ 
weapons, but to enjoy their humiliation. The green can also symbolize his 
greenness in the ways of the world. He is yet to learn the karmic lesson of “what 
goes around, comes around.” Second, if we see ourselves as the victims, we can 
interpret the red and green as symbols of growth and the wisdom gained from 
the experience of conflict. This also links with the card’s number, five, the 
number of mankind and our physical experience on the earth plane. Five is also 
the quintessence, or fifth element in alchemy. In the Five of Swords, the 
quintessence is experience or what we gain from the aftermath of battle. This is 
symbolized on the card by the blue sky behind the slashed clouds and the calm 
waters of the sea: The storm is abating. 

On the kabbalistic Tree of Life, the sphere associated with this card is 
Geburah, or power, which means conflict and judgment—in this Five of Swords, 
it reveals the need for power and control, the impetus behind the battle. Geburah 
is ruled by the planet Mars, known as the war-bringer. 

The astrological association of Venus in Aquarius gives the meaning of 
idealism, one of Aquarius’s attributes, with sensitive, romantic Venus; one 
interpretation is unconventional choices; it may also reveal a clash of fantasy and 
pragmatism. This is reflected in the card’s upright meaning to retreat when battle 
is done, rather than continue to fight in a war that cannot be won. 


UPRIGHT MEANING 

The traditional meaning of this Five of Swords is battle and loss. It often shows 
family disputes, conflicts with managers, and also being the victim of “the 



system”—specifically, educational boards and government and educational 
bodies. In relationships, the card predicts tension and conflict. Overall, the Five 
of Swords reveals ongoing stress, continual challenges to your position—and, 
often, defeat. 

However this disruptive Five of Swords manifests for you, the overriding 
message is that all is not lost. You may not win the battle, but you can recover 
and walk away with your self-respect—provided you make a gracious exit at the 
right time. There’s a danger here that you continue the fight even when the battle 
is over. Regardless of the provocation, deal with your anger and disappointment. 
There’s a saying, “It’s all over, bar the shouting.” Don’t keep shouting too much 
longer or hope to revisit the situation or relationship. It’s done. 


REVERSED MEANING 

The Five of Swords reversed shows unnecessary conflict; you could become 
caught in the middle of another person’s fight, and you may be the injured party 
through no fault of your own. This battle is not for good reason. Whoever 
initiates it has a selfish agenda; this person may be trying to cover up his or her 
incompetence at work, blaming others to deflect attention; equally, the drama 
may be due to ego and a need to make a show of power. In this sense, it can be 
easier to extricate yourself because you know the battle is less personal. 

An additional meaning of the card is bullying and oppression. There is no 
shame in this—rather, the card suggests finding an opportunity to expose the 
unfairness and to shift the balance of power. 




Element: Air 

Astrological Association: Mercury in Aquarius 
Number: 6 

Tree of Life Sphere: Tiphareth, the sphere of beauty and rebirth 
Key Meaning: Moving on 



























2E 



• 1990 U S CUm*» Sy»t*m» Inc 












































UNDERSTANDING THE SIX OF SWORDS 


The Six of Swords is one of the more positive Swords cards, along with the 
winning Ace (see page 176) and the peaceful Four (see page 184). In this card, 
there are battles, blindfolds, or stress: A ferryman is steering a boat to a 
promising destination with gentle hills and trees. We see the water on the right of 
the boat is choppy, whereas the water before him is calm. The troubled water 
symbolizes a rough situation he is moving away from and the still waters ahead, 
a period of serenity away from strife. 

He is accompanied by two passengers, a child and a shrouded figure, perhaps 
the child’s mother. All three figures face away from us, suggesting they are fixed 
on their destination; the decision to leave has been made, and the journey has 
begun. This determined focus is a feature of the card’s astrological association, 
Mercury in Aquarius, which also suggests a rational approach that is in keeping 
with Swords, the suit of the mind. The card’s gray sky is neutral, so there is no 
emotion here; the ferryman is a neutral actor, too, paid for his services without 
any attachment to the outcome. The card’s Tree of Life sphere, Tiphareth, means 
beauty and rebirth, offering a happy new beginning for the ferryman’s 
passengers. One further aspect to note is the traditional role of the male ferryman 
as active and the female passenger as passive. The presence of male yang and 
female yin energy in balance suggests peace and harmony, which chimes with 
the card’s numerological association. 

The number six stands for serenity and peace. The six-pointed Star of David 
comprises two triangles, representing the concept of heaven on earth—a 
reminder that we can realize the heavenly and spiritual aspects of ourselves in 
our daily lives to enjoy harmony in mind, body, and spirit. In the Six of Swords, 
the two themes are the present and the future. The challenge is to integrate our 
experiences and move forward. 


UPRIGHT MEANING 

The Six of Swords shows you moving on from a situation or relationship and 
enjoying a period of peace and harmony. This may manifest mentally rather than 
physically, as you take a more detached approach, distancing yourself from 
drama and complication. This gives you an opportunity to rest and recharge; it 
may lead you to explore a new environment or make a spiritual discovery. 

In work, the card can show travel as part of your role (and respite from the 


office or other workplace), and in relationships, the card commonly shows two 
people spending time apart. More negatively, the interpretation is a relationship 
ending (look for accompanying cards such as the Three of Swords or the revised 
VI, The Lovers, for validation). This ending may be positive or negative, 
depending on your situation. 

On a more literal note, the card can simply show taking a break from work or 
your usual environment, and you may travel, possibly on a trip overseas. When 
the Six of Swords appears with major arcana cards VII, The Chariot, for 
progress and XIII, Death, for transition, a more permanent move is suggested, so 
the combination can be interpreted as emigration or a long period of travel. If we 
see the three figures on the card as a family rather than ferryman and passengers, 
the card suggests a major move for two or more people. 


REVERSED MEANING 

When reversed, the Six of Swords has a meaning that is similar to that of the 
upright card. It reveals a need to escape, but your plans are delayed. It may not 
be the right time for you to travel or leave an unsatisfying situation, as certain 
problems need to be addressed and resolved before you can be free. However, 
check that your intentions are sound and that you’re looking in the right 
direction; rather than fixating on a particular outcome, which may blind you to 
other possibilities, keep your plans realistic. You may feel frustrated now by lack 
of progress, but stay focused and grounded and your time will come. 




Element: Air 

Astrological Association: Moon in Aquarius 
Number: 7 

Tree of Life Position: Netzach, the sphere of endurance, instinct, and desire 
Key Meanings: Theft and dishonesty 























• i»o uS Om me 


























UNDERSTANDING THE SEVEN OF SWORDS 


A smug thief makes off with five of seven swords while an encampment is 
unguarded. The inhabitants are silhouettes, engrossed elsewhere while their 
weapons are stolen. This seems an easy take—the tent doors are open, and their 
bright colors make them attractive to the passerby. The thief knows he is safe 
with his hoard and gives a sarcastic smile as he looks back at the site, knowing 
full well he will not be discovered. The card’s bright yellow background 
symbolizes consciousness, so this thief does not operate in secret under cover of 
night. He commits daylight robbery. 

His dress is ostentatious. His red, fur-trimmed boots and matching hat give 
the impression of someone with a sense of entitlement to the best things life has 
to offer—except, he is willing to possess them by illegal means. The red 
symbolizes energy, ego, and the material world. Red on his feet suggests he will 
act on his ego to get what he wants. Note how his boots and hat don’t fit with the 
rest of his outfit; perhaps they are stolen, too, as they make a sharp contrast with 
his everyday leggings and basic drawstring shirt, the clothes of the common man 
—or common thief. 

One question remains, however. Why does the thief leave two swords behind? 
The two remaining swords highlight one of the positive meanings of the card, in 
that the victims may still defend themselves, even when their opponent has the 
advantage. The thief takes with him just five swords. Five in the minor arcana is 
also the number of upheaval—the Five of Swords, conflict; the Five of 
Pentacles, money issues; the Five of Wands, challenges; and the Five of Cups, 
loss. 

The card’s Tree of Life sphere is Netzach, which means endurance and 
instinct. These are the qualities the potential victim will need to uncover the 
identity of the thief; they are also the personality of the thief himself, in his 
willingness to take risks. He is also able to wait patiently for the right moment to 
strike. Further qualities are revealed by the astrological association of the Seven 
of Swords with the Moon in Aquarius, which blends the Moon’s intuition with 
Aquarius’s idealism and detachment. 

The number seven is a mystical number. It was sacred to the god Apollo, 
founder of the famous Delphic oracle, and is the number of the days of the week, 
the deadly sins, and the wonders of the world (see Understanding The Chariot, 
page 58). Seven represents possibilities, as it comprises three, the number of 
heaven, and four, the number of earth, and so shows the potential to bring 
heaven down to earth—to manifest an ideal. However, in the Seven of Swords, 


the thief’s idea of heaven on earth has moral implications. 


UPRIGHT MEANING 

The common name for this Seven of Swords is “the thief.” Traditionally, the 
message is to protect your belongings and property. In general, we can think of 
this as a potential transgression—you may encounter a challenge to your 
position, an individual invading your space, or in relationships, a selfish partner 
who takes too much emotionally, or at worst, defrauds you. As the suit of 
Swords relates to intellect, you’ll need your instincts and your wits to discover 
the truth. You may need to be devious and play this person at his or her own 
game, too, to find out what you need to know. Your opponent may be strong, but 
you still have valuable resources on your side. 

The card can also show legal problems, and unfair or fraudulent business 
dealings. 


REVERSED MEANING 

The reversed Seven of Swords shows a tendency to give up rather than take a 
stand. It may feel unnatural to you to think like your opponent to anticipate their 
next moves, but this attitude will help you defend what is yours. Otherwise, you 
may surrender too soon. This particularly applies to work, when a colleague tries 
to disempower you. It’s important to stand your ground. 

As with the upright card, the reversed Seven of Swords can show legal 
problems of and in business dealings, beware of unscrupulous people. 




Element: Air 

Astrological Association: Jupiter in Gemini 
Number: 8 

Tree of Life Position: Hod, the sphere of majesty and the mind 
Key Meaning: Restriction 




























































































UNDERSTANDING THE EIGHT OF SWORDS 


The Eight of Swords shows a fairytale gone bad: A maiden is outcast from a 
castle, and her hands are bound. She stands alone within a semicircle of planted 
swords, with her back turned to her home. A hostage, she is a symbol of 
otherness, separated from the castle, which stands for civilization and inclusion. 
Her red robes symbolize energy, but she is tied, so her movements are restricted. 
The rock pools look pretty and innocuous, but if she cannot shift her position 
soon, she may be in danger when the water rises with the high tide. Her eyes are 
blindfolded, symbolizing an inability to see a way ahead. A blindfolded woman 
also features on the Two of Swords, the “stalemate” card—so perhaps the 
hostage of the Eight of Swords was once the Two, but now her bonds are tighter 
and her situation more precarious. 

Thankfully, this bondage will not last: A. E. Waite, the Rider-Waite tarot’s 
creator, says, “it is rather a card of temporary durance than of irretrievable 
bondage.” At some point, our maiden will muster the determination to save 
herself; no prince on a white charger will come. 

The astrological association of this Eight of Swords is expansive Jupiter in 
sociable Gemini, a highly creative and intellectual combination. The challenge is 
to manage information overload, as ideas can go too far, leading to potential 
failure due to a lack of perspective and focus—a link with the blindfolded 
hostage, the card’s central image. 

The card’s number is eight, and one of its meanings is change, renewal, and 
stability. This reflects the hostage’s need to extricate herself from thoughts that 
are keeping her trapped and to find new ground. As Swords are the suit of Air, 
which rules the mind, this also links with card’s Tree of Life sphere, Hod. Its 
common meaning is majesty, and in this Eight of Swords, refers to the mastery 
of the mind. 


UPRIGHT MEANING 

The upright card shows feeling trapped. This may be due to a series of bad 
experiences and poor luck, and you begin to wonder if things can ever improve. 
You may be anxious due to an unsatisfactory bond with an individual or an 
organization; specifically, you may be trapped by a credit agreement that leaves 
you little money for yourself. 

This unfortunate Eight of Swords commonly reveals problems in careers and 



the intellectual or mental realm, showing frustration and, at its most extreme, 
panic. Hemmed in and unhappy, you may be finding it impossible to do your 
work to your satisfaction due to unreasonable demands or disorganized 
management. Also, there may be a sense of conversations going on behind 
closed doors that you are not party to, so you feel isolated and even vulnerable. 
The card commonly arises in readings to show someone who is in a role that 
doesn’t suit them, but they are under pressure to conform—such as working in 
the family business or taking a course because it will lead to a profession, 
although it isn’t what they love doing at all. Many creatives and lightworkers go 
through this experience of not fitting in, but it takes time and confidence to find 
your path. You can release yourself from these bonds, but it will take 
determination, and you may need to swallow your pride and ask others for 
support and advice. On a social level, the Eight of Swords can show you feeling 
humiliated or ignored, and you fear others’ attitudes toward you. 

An additional meaning of the card is illness and incapacity. Again, this does 
not imply permanent disability, but a phase of physical restriction. 


REVERSED MEANING 

In the reversed position, much of the upright meaning applies, except that it is 
often accompanied by strong emotions such as guilt, anger, and regret. It’s likely 
you’ll express these feelings in negative ways, however, because you are so 
frustrated; try not to lash out on whoever is closest. As with all the minor arcana 
cards, the Eight of Swords shows a phase that will not last. 



NINE OF SWORDS 



Element: Air 

Astrological Association: Mars in Gemini 
Number: 9 

Tree of Life Position: Yesod, the sphere of foundation and the unconscious 
mind 


Key Meaning: Anxiety 































US G»m#$ 






















































UNDERSTANDING THE NINE OF SWORDS 


The meaning of the Nine of Swords, like many of the cards of the suit, is 
obvious at first glance. An anguished figure sits upright in bed, awake in the 
night in clear distress. Nine horizontal swords appear behind and above the 
figure, like bars at a window. Swords represent the intellect and thoughts, here 
en masse as a symbol of restriction; their hilts are crossing, crowding the space 
like unwanted thoughts. The third sword from the bottom crosses the crown of 
his head, oppressing him; the second sword from bottom strikes through his 
head; and the lowest sword appears to cut through the area of his heart. What 
began in the mind now hurts him at a deep level, and he is cut off from usual 
sources of comfort in a painful internal struggle. 

The mattress is a pale purple color, the color of intuition, linking with the 
card’s Tree of Life sphere Yesod, which is ruled by the Moon, ruler of the 
unconscious mind. The pastoral scene carved on the side of the bed or couch is 
suggestive of dreams, but the two figures depicted are not at peace; there is an 
aggressive current to the image. A figure is brandishing an implement at a prone 
figure, indicating that the dreamer is a victim of his thoughts. 

In contrast to the dark feel of the card, the quilt is bright and beautiful, 
showing the twelve glyphs of the zodiac signs with alternating patches of red 
roses. The glyphs represent multitude—rather than having any individual 
significance, they tell us that the person’s worry may encompass lots of life 
aspects. The red roses are a symbol of love and hope. The dreamer cannot see 
this just now, as his hands are covering his eyes, much like the two beggars on 
the Five of Pentacles, who cannot see the money tree depicted in the beautiful 
stained-glass window about them. 

The card’s number is nine, or three sets of three. Three is a dynamic number, 
and when multiplied by itself, symbolizes intense productivity—however, in the 
suit of Swords, the mind is overproductive, awash with worries and negative 
thoughts. 

The astrological association, Mars and Gemini, is a forceful combination. 
Free-spirited Gemini is controlled by Mars, an unstoppable, aggressive force, 
bringing frustration and a sense of entrapment. 


UPRIGHT MEANING 

I call this Nine “the 3 a.m. card” because it describes the meaning so accurately: 



It’s what you wake up worrying about in the small hours of the night, showing 
you are dealing with high levels of anxiety. You may have suffered an illness and 
the resulting low energy or a shock or a buildup of minor stresses that begin to 
disrupt your sleep patterns and peace of mind. External events such as these may 
have triggered the initial stress, but the issue now is how you are responding to 
it. 

Look to the surrounding cards to see the life area that this relates to, although 
the anxiety in the Nine of Swords can reflect unhappiness in key areas, from 
work to relationships, coloring your usually positive attitude. The card also 
indicates the habit of worry—so you may be worrying about inconsequential 
things that usually don’t warrant your attention. Thankfully, as this is a minor 
card, this pattern is temporary. 

In work, the Nine of Swords can show feeling overwhelmed. You simply 
have too much to do, particularly if the card appears with the Ten of Wands, 
known as the burden card. 

The Nine of Swards occasionally comes up in a reading to show mental 
health issues associated with anxiety, such as panic disorder or anxiety and 
depression. Insomnia and nightmares are additional interpretations. 


REVERSED MEANING 

Unfortunately, as you might expect, the reversed Nine’s meaning is more 
extreme than that of its upright counterpart and traditionally means despair, guilt, 
or feeling trapped. However, this is the lowest point of the cycle, and these 
feeling will begin to shift. As you gradually move out of this difficult phase, you 
will feel more able to turn these feelings of powerlessness around. Be patient and 
compassionate with yourself and turn to others for support rather than suffering 
alone. 



TEN OF SWORDS 



Element: Air 

Astrological Association: Mercury in Virgo 
Number: 10 

Tree of Life Position: Malkuth, the Kingdom, the sphere of experience 
Key Meaning: Endings 






















• '990US Gamw 






























UNDERSTANDING THE TEN OF SWORDS 


The Ten of Swords has a black background that appears on the Nine of Swords 
(known as the stress card) and card XV, The Devil. We are indeed in a dark place 
again here, as we see a young man pinned to the ground by ten swords 
embedded along the length of his back. There’s also a sense of shock in the card, 
symbolized by the blue water, purple mountains, and yellow sky set against 
charcoal-gray clouds, heavy with rain, in a black sky. This dual skyscape 
represents two worlds: the bright outlook of the “before-world” prior to the 
conflict and the “after-world,” in which everything is changed and a sudden 
darkness descends like a shroud, to eventually cover the body. The victim is 
facedown and does not show his face, as if he is no longer relevant; the focus of 
the card is the points of the swords. 

The victim’s right hand is slightly twisted, and if we look closely, we see it 
makes the sign of blessing, with the first two fingers straight as in card V, The 
Hierophant (see page 50). In this sense, we may interpret the figure as a fallen 
master or guru; or this pose may be a sign of the man’s acceptance of this ending 
—that what has befallen him is in fact a blessing. A red cloth is draped over him, 
and the fabric flows like blood from his body. Red symbolizes love, vitality, and, 
here, the life force, or blood. 

In numerology, ten represents completeness and perfection. In the Ten of 
Swords, the completeness is an ending. The individual sphere associated with 
this card is Malkuth, for kingdom—so the Ten of Swords reveals an end to our 
personal kingdom or one aspect of our material world. 

This card’s astrological association of the Sun in Gemini brings a bright, 
sociable influence that is at odds with the card’s meaning and can only highlight 
newfound happiness after the influence of this dark card has passed. As the sun 
goes down on a life phase, the Sun in Gemini offers light at the end of the tunnel. 


UPRIGHT MEANING 

The traditional meaning of the upright card is ruin. While this sounds 
frightening, it does not, however, mean death or destruction; it is also worth 
bearing in mind that this event, although sudden, has a history. This is not an act 
of God, like the lightning strike of card XVI, The Tower, but the natural outcome 
of a culmination of events that leads to inevitable change. This ending clears the 
way for new possibilities, and you may find the finality of it releases you from 


frustration and stress, as is expressed in the preceding card, the Nine of Swords 
(see page 192). In this sense, the Ten of Swords is an aspect of card XIII, Death, 
in its meaning of endings, transition, and new beginnings. 

In your personal life, bonds of friendship may break, and there may be no 
turning back; this, unfortunately, is unavoidable, but with hindsight, you may see 
that certain people in a group were causing discord and stress. In love 
relationships, the card signifies a dramatic ending (particularly if it appears close 
to the Three of Cups, the “sorrow” card). However, the Ten of Swords often 
applies to a group of people, rather than individuals. In work, this may manifest 
as the closure of a department accompanied by job loss or a failing business. 

On a more positive note, this is the end of an era; soon the strife and upset 
will be over. Health issues, such as low energy and exhaustion, will improve. 


REVERSED MEANING 

When reversed, the Ten of Swords holds the meaning of the upright card, but 
indicates there may be more repercussions. You may examine your past actions 
and feel guilty or angry and react more deeply to the fallout; try not to hold on to 
the stress. Accept the situation and let go. 

The reversed Ten of Swords can also show feeling helpless, particularly if 
you have been ill or overwhelmed emotionally. Soon you will feel able to pick 
yourself up and start over. 



Element: Earth of the suit of Air 

Key Meanings: Intelligence and contracts 


























UNDERSTANDING THE PAGE OF SWORDS 


A young man stands strong, sword raised in both hands and alert to the signs of 
trouble. The landscape is blown with clouds, and we see a lone tree almost 
doubled over by the wind. A circling flock of black birds suggests something is 
about to take flight or take form. Whatever happens, though, our hero is poised 
for action in unsettled times. On high ground, he has chosen the best position to 
fend off any enemy. He stands tall for all to see and brandishes his sword. The 
weapon is a symbol of his intention and his mind, which extends beyond the 
edge of the card itself. He is willing to deal with known and unknown threats, to 
plan his response and ultimately to win. While not dressed for battle—he has no 
armor and possibly no experience of conflict—his pose suggests he is ready to 
attack or defend; looking over his right shoulder away from his sword, he is alert 
to attack. He minds his position on both sides, a knight in training—his tunic is 
dark red, a regal color, symbolizing his ambition to rise through the ranks. His 
boots are red, for energy and matter, while his hose and sleeves are yellow, a 
symbol of the intellect. 

The mountains beyond are blue, a color commonly used in this tarot to denote 
truth and spirituality (think card II, The High Priestess, and her robes, or VII, 

The Chariot, and its heavenly canopy of stars). Like card XI, Justice, this Page 
with his sword cuts to the truth, bringing clarity: The clouds disappear. 

Young, feisty, and confident, the Page of Swords is clear-thinking and 
dedicated to his cause. His element is Earth of Air. His foremost skill is his 
intellect and wit, so when combined with practical Earth, he is a strategist, 
planning the most effective action to take. The negative aspect of this Earth-Air 
pairing is conflict between Air’s need to show off and Earth’s pragmatism. If Air 
dominates, the Page of Swords can be precocious and superficial, losing sight of 
the bigger picture. 

Pages and Knights in tarot are generally regarded as people or influences, 
whereas the other court cards (the Queens and Kings) are assumed to be people. 
Let your intuition guide you toward the most appropriate meaning for the Page 
in a reading by working with the card’s imagery first, then the written 
interpretations (see also the Introduction, page 8). 


UPRIGHT MEANING 

As an influence: This card denotes useful information. Your hard work pays off 



in business and other work dealings. The Page of Swords also suggests people 
around you will be helpful, furthering your ambitions. This is a time to be alert 
and observe carefully what others say. Be ready to take action as you as you see 
the right opportunity and consult others who can act as advocates on your behalf. 

This card often comes up in readings to say that a contract will be coming 
your way—regarding property, careers, travel documents, and other agreements. 

As a person: The Page of Swords suggests an individual who is charming, 
clever, and very good company. As he’s a Page, this is often a younger person or 
someone with a youthful, quick-fire brain. He may be forthright with his words, 
but he is ultimately a good ally who can turn challenges into opportunities. 

Quick to learn, he is curious and open, but the downside is that he can be 
mischievous and so set on achieving his aims he forgets to treat others with 
sensitivity. 

As the “you” card in a reading: Rely on your intelligence. 

As an influence: If two or more Pages fall close together in a reading, the 
meanings are as follows: 

& Two Pages: Friendship if upright; rivalry if one or both cards are reversed 

Three Pages: Lots of social activities 
& Four Pages: A social group of young people 


REVERSED MEANING 

When reversed, this clever Page of Swords becomes manipulative and cunning. 
Be cautious about information you receive now, as it may not be reliable, and be 
discerning about what you hear about other people, as it may be unjust and even 
slanderous. As a person, the reversed Page of Swords can be a gossip who seems 
to care little about the misconceptions he spreads. At his worst, he can be 
devious and unscrupulous. Ignore his needs for constant attention; don’t fuel his 
fire. 



Element: Fire of Air 

Astrological Associations: Taurus and Gemini 
Key Meanings: Stress and truth 
















KNIGHT Jr SWORDS. 


'990US 















UNDERSTANDING THE KNIGHT OF SWORDS 


Such is the force of the Knight of Swords that even his horse seems on the brink 
of terror as they leap toward an unseen enemy. The Knight, in full battle armor, 
is on the brink of war, his sword brandished, horse’s reins held high, and feet 
forced down into the stirrups to urge the animal to keep pace. His visor is up, 
showing us that he is more than ready to look his enemy in the eye. 

The wind is against him—the trees to the left of the card bend to the right 
while our rider gallops to the left—a sign that he is not afraid to ride toward, not 
from, whatever opposes him. The desert landscape is rather bleak, a symbol for 
the need to survive, and the clouds are ragged, as if the Knight had sliced them 
to pieces. His sword extends beyond the card, like that of the Page of Swords, to 
suggest that this Knight’s intention goes far beyond the limited landscape we 
see. Fixated on his mission, it feels as if nothing can stop him. The “true blue” of 
his armor and horse bridle and collar show he is prepared to cut to the heart of 
the enemy—or matter—at hand. 

The card’s element is Fire of the suit of Air. Fire, or passionate energy, is 
symbolized by his red cape and plume, and Air is denoted by the birds and 
butterflies decorating the horse’s collar. The mix of air, or wind, with fire, or 
lightning, suggests thunderstorms and hurricanes—a surge of power that erupts 
then dissipates. This is the Knight’s modus operandi. He charges, confronts the 
enemy, and then departs in a flash. 

Knights and Pages in tarot are generally regarded as people or influences, 
whereas the other court cards (the Queens and Kings) are assumed to be people. 
Let your intuition guide you toward the most appropriate meaning for the Knight 
in a reading by working with the card’s imagery first, then the written 
interpretations here (see also the Introduction, page 8). 


UPRIGHT MEANING 

As an influence: Unpredictable, tempestuous times are ahead—you’re in for a 
roller coaster drama of highs and lows. Sudden truths may come to light or 
underlying conflicts are exposed. This may be illuminating, stressful, or 
bewildering, depending on your position. 

The card often comes up to show disputes at work and tension within families 
and in romantic relationships. While you may not be responsible for the cause of 
the trouble, what counts now is how you recover. There is a way forward, but 


you may need to wait until the situation is calmer before you can make a move. 

As a person: The Knight of Swords is determined and driven, and he has a 
strong sense of himself and his mission. He may be quirky and entertaining with 
an offbeat sense of humor, and he may even dress in a distinctive way. Incisive, 
forthright, and intelligent, he makes a strong advocate and is prepared to fight 
for his beliefs. The downside is that he often makes his mark, gets bored, and 
moves on. In relationships, he may cause drama, but takes no responsibility for 
reconciliation, leaving others to make peace while he’s charging ahead with his 
next obsession. In work, he can show up in readings to represent auditors and 
other assessors, such as doctors and lawyers, or consultants who are hired to fire, 
not fix—in short, professionals who are adept at diagnoses and whose opinions 
matter. Ultimately, though, you are the one who will have to deal with the 
outcomes. 

As the “you” card in a reading: Expect the unexpected. 

As an influence: If two or more Knights fall close together in a reading, the 
meanings are as follows: 

v?>" Two Knights: Friendship if upright; rivalry if one or both cards are reversed 
& Three Knights: Men meeting up 
& Four Knights: Lots of action; events speed up 


REVERSED MEANING 

When reversed, the King of Swords means stressful situations are blown out of 
proportion as an individual thrives on drama but lacks the courage to take 
control. The card also advises that you may be let down by someone you thought 
was reliable and steadfast. A person with a big personality may have lots to say 
but have little substance. However, this individual’s high intelligence means he 
usually talks his way out of trouble, denying any involvement. 



Element: Water of the suit of Air 
Astrological Associations: Virgo and Libra 
Chakras: Crown and third eye, for openness and intuition 
Key Meaning: An incisive woman 


















QUEEN rft SWORDS. 




A 


l 


• 1090 U S Gam«» 




























UNDERSTANDING THE QUEEN OF SWORDS 

The Queen of Swords is an aspect of card III, The Empress, or mother archetype. 
This Queen is the “mind” aspect of the mother, just as the Queen of Cups is the 
heart (see page 144 and The Empress, page 42). 

Our Swords Queen has a sense of sovereignty like no other—she is the only 
female monarch shown in profile, like a head on a coin. One hand is raised, as if 
to greet a visitor, and like the Queen of Wands, her pose is alert. This is a woman 
in charge: She holds her sword at a perfect right angle to her throne arm and sits 
on high ground, giving a sense of authority over her domain. 

The card’s element is Water of Air. We see the Water element in the river 
below four trees; it extends from the Queen’s red veil, which flows down behind 
her throne. This creates the effect of a river of blood, a reminder that this Queen, 
unlike her jewelry, is not for show. If necessary, she will fight, and it won’t be 
pretty. 

The Air element, for the mind, is expressed through motifs of winged 
creatures—the single bird, the cherub, and the butterflies on her throne and 
crown. Her butterfly crown is open, a sign that she welcomes ideas and opinions. 
She is very much part of her airy landscape, wearing clouds on her cloak and 
white, billowing robes. The blue-sky background symbolizes her motivation to 
find the truth. 

On her throne are two crescents: either two crescent moons or two sickles, or 
curved blades. As moons, they link her to the crescents on card II, The High 
Priestess, who deals with the hidden world of the subconscious and the sixth 
sense: The Queen of Swords also has sharp instincts and is not afraid to follow 
them. As sickles, they echo the purpose of her magical object, the sword, again 
linking with her element of Air. 

Queens and Kings in tarot are traditionally regarded as people in your life or 
people about to come into your orbit. However, you can also read the Queen as a 
general influence, so this interpretation is included last. 


UPRIGHT MEANING 

As a person: An astute strategist, the Queen of Swords is single-minded and 
highly ambitious. Like her sign of Libra, she can quickly assess all aspects of a 
situation to get to the truth, including the underlying psychological motivation 
for others’ attitudes and actions. Adept at numbers, she may be an administrator, 


IT specialist, researcher, or financial executive—the need for attention to detail 
relates to her associated sign of Virgo. Sword Queens also make successful 
businesswomen or bosses. She has much life experience and may have had 
hurdles to overcome in her early years. This makes her the strong woman she is. 
For all this, she is still willing to take risks on new experiences and relationships. 
She does not suffer fools gladly, but if she likes you, she will reward and trust 
you implicitly. 

Traditionally, this card is known as the widow, but means in general a single 
woman or a woman who has to make her own way in the world. It’s also a 
common card for single parents. 

As the “you” card in a reading: Be determined and stand strong. 

As an influence: The Queen of Swords offers wisdom and intelligence, 
perspective, and the ability to see the bigger picture. When placed closed to 
negative cards in a reading, the Queen shows strength in adversity. 

If two or more Queens fall close together in a reading, the meanings are as 
follows: 

& Two Queens: Rivalry 

■vV Three Queens: Helpful friends 

& Four Queens: Women meeting up 


REVERSED MEANING 

Reversed, the Queen of Swords suggests excuses for bad behavior or a situation 
in which you are unjustly attacked. As a person, this individual can be an 
opponent or someone who has suddenly turned bitter and vengeful. However, a 
common reason for the Queen to invert can be extreme stress—this woman lacks 
awareness of just how unreasonable her demands have become. If this is the 
case, back away; she must help herself. 



Element: Air of the suit of Air 
Astrological Association: Capricorn and Aquarius 
Chakras: Crown and third eye, for openness and intuition 
Key Meaning: An ambitious man 
















KING SWORDS. 


1990 u S G»m*» SyiMmt. Inc 




















UNDERSTANDING THE KING OF SWORDS 


The King of Swords can be considered as an aspect of card IV, The Emperor, or 
a father archetype who brings structure, order, and authority. The realm of the 
King of Swords is the mind, just as the King of Cups rules the heart, the King of 
Pentacles, the physical body, and the King of Wands, the soul (see pages 146, 
174, 230, and The Emperor, page 46). 

The King is comfortable in his regal position and resembles card XI, Justice, 
in his pose with Justice’s sword (see page 74). Like his partner, the Queen of 
Swords, the King’s throne is engraved with butterfly motifs, for his element of 
Air. On the right—almost perching on the King’s shoulder—is a female fairy. 
The two crescents forming a crest with the butterflies at the top of the throne 
may be sickles, another implement that cuts like his sword. Equally, they could 
be two moons. One of the moons of Uranus, the planet of awakening that rules 
the King’s sign of Aquarius, is named Titania, after the legendary queen of the 
fairies. If the fairy on the throne is intended to be the beautiful but cruel Titania, 
she embodies the dark and light sides of the King’s mighty sword: This 
charming sovereign can be ruthless. 

The card’s element is Air of Air, so this King is idealistic and ambitious. His 
throne is placed above the base of the trees, suggesting perspective from a high 
position. His sword is held at an angle, rather than in upright, ceremonial pose, 
so we sense he is familiar with the feel of its swipe. The clouds, symbols of 
doubt or confusion, seem banished to the mid- and lower parts of the card, as if 
the King had just cut through the clouds above him, revealing a soft bluish sky. 
Blue is the color of truth and clarity, echoed in the color of his robes. 

The King’s purple cloak stands for intuition, and the red cap and orange 
sleeves are for passion and the material world. He focuses his sharp mind on 
what needs to be done. 

Kings and Queens in tarot are traditionally regarded as people in your life, or 
people about to come into your orbit. However, you can also read the King as a 
general influence, so this interpretation is included last. 


UPRIGHT MEANING 

As a person: The King of Swords can be an intellectual or a man who relies on 
logic to help him win. He is also open to ideas, although he can be impatient if 
he has to wait for a consensus before taking action. However, he is outwardly 


calm and makes good judgments. He often has a dry sense of humor and is very 
charming. In readings, he can appear as a seductive man you meet at work or 
through other professional connections. 

His ideal vocations include traditional professions, and you will often find 
him in powerful roles: doctor, judge, solicitor, or member of the armed forces or 
law enforcement; academic, IT, and research work may appeal, and in business, 
he is often a manager or director. Whatever profession he chooses, he must be 
able to make decisions that make a difference, and preferably, have hands-on 
involvement. 

As the “you” card in a reading: Take charge. 

As an influence: When the King of Swords arrives in a reading, the focus is 
on the mind rather than the heart. You may be going through an intensive time of 
work or study. In relationships and domestic affairs, it’s time to take the 
initiative. 

If two or more Kings fall close together in a reading, the meanings are as 
follows: 

& Two Kings: A good partnership 
& Three Kings: Influential men 
& Four Kings: A power battle 


REVERSED MEANING 

When reversed, the influence of the usually balanced King of Swords can be 
destructive. You may be put under unreasonable pressure to produce results. 
Unfortunately, there’s no room for argument or personal interpretations, so you 
may feel oppressed. Thankfully, this is a temporary situation. As a person, you 
may be dealing with someone who plays mind games and who will do almost 
anything to win. 


The Suit of Wands 

ACE OF WANDS 



Element: Fire 

Astrological Associations: The Fire signs—Aries, Leo, and Sagittarius 

Number: 1 

Tree of Life Position: Kether, the sphere of divine light 
Key Meanings: Enterprise, career, travel, and beginnings 














ACE o> WANDS. 


* 1990 U S G»t*» Sytltmt Inc 









UNDERSTANDING THE ACE OF WANDS 


A hand, offering a single wand, appears from a cloud. The Ace of Wands is the 
only card of the suit to show multiple buds, symbolizing new ventures. There are 
four leaves on one stem, and the two lower stems each have three leaves. A 
further eight leaves float around the wand, giving a total of eighteen. This may 
relate to the eighteenth letter of the Hebrew alphabet, Tzaddi, meaning hope. The 
leaves are similar in appearance to the droplets on the Ace of Cups; the Ace of 
Swords; XVI, The Tower; and XVIII, The Moon (see pages 120, 176, 94, and 
102 ). 

The scene below shows purple mountains, symbols of spiritual goals. A 
building, a fairytale castle or a monastery, is perched on a hill—signifying the 
ambition to attain a dream or spiritual aspiration. The castle is isolated and 
protected by high walls and a tower. Seeing the strong wand grasped before us, 
we may view it as a club, held high in a gesture of protection and ownership of 
the land. In the valley, pure water flows, the blue a color for true purpose. Three 
trees grow on the right bank, symbols of growth and fertility. 

Unlike the cultivated garden of the Ace of Pentacles, the landscape of the Ace 
of Wands is natural and untamed: This Ace is a true pioneer, venturing into wild 
new territory. In this sense, the card presents the gift of enterprise and adventure. 
As with the other Ace cards and their symbols, the offering is made with the 
right hand, the wand held with the hand of giving (as opposed to the left hand, 
which is the receiving hand). 

The second gift of the Ace of Wands is the drive to succeed. We may have an 
enticing vision or prospect, but need the energy to make it happen. The card’s 
element is Fire, full of burning purpose—just as the wand, if planted, will 
determinedly grow into a tall, strong tree. The card’s Tree of Life sphere is 
Kether, for the divine light of God, or great spirit. In the Ace of Wands, this 
stands for the spirit of adventure. 

The Aces offer the pure energy of their suits. As number ones, they represent 
oneness with the divine spirit or God. Indivisible, their energy is singular, strong, 
and purposeful. They all represent beginnings, impulses, and new possibilities, 
in the most pure and obvious form. 


UPRIGHT MEANING 

The upright meaning of the Ace of Wands is auspicious for every aspect of your 



life. In a spread, it overrules any negative minor arcana cards close by (just like 
the major arcana card XIX, The Sun). The Ace predicts new beginnings, 
enterprise, and invention and often relates to work issues and projects. It’s a 
happy card for creative work, too. With this Ace, you experience a flash of 
inspiration and know what do next to give form to your concept. 

As you conceive ideas, so the card works at a literal level as a phallic symbol, 
for male virility and starting a family. 

An additional meaning of the card is travel and adventure, particularly when 
it appears in a reading with the Three or Eight of Wands (see pages 208 and 
218). 

In a reading, one Ace brings a focus on the life area according to the suit, 
which can set the theme of the reading. If two or more Aces appear near each 
other in a reading, it means the following: 

& Two Aces: An important partnership 
Three Aces: Good news 

& Four Aces: Excitement, beginnings, and potential 


REVERSED MEANING 

When the Ace of Wands reverses, it can show blocks to creative projects and 
delays to travel. In work, a project may be abandoned or postponed due to poor 
management. In general, the card reveals false starts; plans need a rethink. 

In relationships, this Ace can reveal a lack of commitment from a man or time 
apart for a couple, usually due to work, and the woman finds herself waiting for 
the man. 

Another common meaning of the reversed Ace of Wands in readings is 
difficulty conceiving a child, particularly if the card appears close to the Three of 
Swords, the card for sorrow (see page 180). 



TWO OF WANDS 


Element: Fire 

Astrological Association: Mars in Aries 
Number: 2 

Tree of Life Position: Chockmah, the sphere of wisdom 
Key Meanings: Plans, partnership, and influence 















































UNDERSTANDING THE TWO OF WANDS 


In the Two of Wands, a young man holds a globe in his right hand and a wand in 
his left hand. The wand is held toward its base, and the man rests it on a raised 
section of wall so that it stands taller than his head. Altogether, these symbols 
offer us the meaning of extension, of looking beyond the immediate vicinity and 
into the future. Positioned at the top of a castle, this is a man with a view: purple 
mountains for goals and intuition, a peaceful lake and sandy shore, and, rising 
into the hills, modest dwellings, forests, and fields. This feels like fertile land, 
where ideas and dreams are nurtured. Our hero has plans, and they are beginning 
to grow, just like the leaves budding from the two wands. He stands partly in 
profile, rather than facing us, gazing into his globe. The two wands on each side 
of our hero and the card’s Roman number, II, create a portal, a doorway to 
another realm of experience, and soon the man will be ready to step into it. This 
links with his Tree of Life sphere, Chockmah, for wisdom. His red robe and hat 
signify vitality and the material world. 

The man on the Two of Wands already knows he is partway toward his 
dream, and he has gained confidence through the work he has already done. This 
is shown by the wand on the right on the card, which stands on the ground, lower 
than the wand he holds. A small ribbon is tied at the base, perhaps as a seal, to 
signify that this wand, or part of his project, is complete. 

On the plinth at the left is the intriguing emblem of a black cross with red- 
and-white flowers: roses for passion, lilies for purity, and the cross for faith. 

(The saltire, or St. Andrew’s cross, is also depicted on the Six of Cups.) Roses 
on a cross can signify the Rosicrucian order, a secret esoteric brotherhood that 
took the Rosy Cross as its symbol. A principal text of Rosicrucianism is the 
fifteenth-century allegory The Chymical Marriage of Christian Rosenkreutz, 
which features a rose cross and a magical castle. On our Two of Wands, both the 
castle wall and cross may be an intentional reference to Rosicrucianism, as this 
order also influenced Freemasonry; the Rider-Waite’s creator, A. E. Waite, was a 
mason, and so familiar with this alchemical image. Note, too, the cross and roses 
design in stone on the Three of Pentacles (see page 152). 

Astrologically, this card is linked with Mars in Aries, a fiery pairing that 
signifies willpower and energy. The challenge is to temper the fire when 
necessary and resist impatience. 


UPRIGHT MEANING 


The Two of Wands shows you making plans and moving forward, so travel 
arrangements are one meaning of the card. In your work, you are gaining 
influence and proving your worth. In return, you receive good support and 
advice. The card can also show new creative partnerships and beginning a new 
project or enterprise. 

As there are two wands on the card, there are also two aspects to your 
situation. Consider what helps you on your path and any issues that hold you 
back. Make a plan that maximizes your strengths so your talent continues to 
shine. 

An additional meaning of the Two of Wands is a new romantic partnership, 
and it often comes up in a reading to reveal that the relationship begins at work 
or through a mutual friendship or leisure interests. Spiritually, too, you are 
feeling more connected within yourself and the world at large, so you may feel 
drawn to development courses or simply spending time connecting with nature. 

Overall, great opportunities are on the way, allowing you to move up a level. 
Make the most of these offers—your star is rising. 


REVERSED MEANING 

When reversed, your talent may be wasted because those who can help you 
progress are not listening. If this is the case, consider a change of scenery. You 
need to be with people who understand your views and appreciate your skills. 
The card can also show misplaced trust and an unreliable partner. Check if those 
close to you are pulling their weight—or you could be the one doing all the 
work. In relationships, a partner is unreliable. 




Element: Fire 

Astrological Association: Sun in Aries 
Number: 3 

Tree of Life Position: Binah, the sphere of understanding 
Key Meanings: Action and adventure 






































UNDERSTANDING THE THREE OF WANDS 


For one time only in the tarot sequence, we see a figure with no visible face. 
Whereas on the Two of Wands the man is in part profile, in the Three he has 
turned his back on us entirely. He has stepped down from the protection of his 
castle and now stands on higher ground right above a bay, where he has planted 
three wands firmly in the land, one of which he also holds. The two wands 
behind him offer protection; the third one he leans on, giving him support. He 
has passed through the portal of two wands and taken a step closer into the scene 
we saw at a distance in card Two. Now, our adventurer’s cloak is a more vibrant 
red, for energy; he sports green, the color of nature and fertility, and wears a thin 
headband like card I, The Magician (page 34), symbolizing the mind—and his 
willpower to succeed. In this card, the man’s headband looks as if it is waiting 
for a Roman victory wreath, the honor given to a homecoming hero. This theme 
continues with the checkered throw that sits over his left shoulder, Roman style; 
the pattern is reminiscent of flags used to signal the start and end of races, 
traditionally taken as a trophy by the champion. With headband and throw, the 
figure on the Three is already signaling that he is one of life’s winners. 

Astrologically, the Three of Wands is linked with the Sun in the sign of Aries. 
This indicates passion, strong communication, and clear goals. The potential 
issue with super-solar Aries is impatience, but that’s because Ariens simply want 
results. This action-driven influence is softened by the meaning of the card’s 
Tree of Life sphere, Binah, for understanding and the receptive feminine 
principle. 

Dynamic number three, number of growth and change, is shown in three 
boats, three wands, and three buds on each wand, reinforcing the card’s meaning 
of productivity—this is work in progress. The boats are pointing away from the 
shore, so we sense that this young man is an entrepreneur who has just launched 
his first fleet of three, carrying valuable cargo to a new destination. The vessels 
are symbols of the beginning of his journey toward distant shores and his future 
goals. 


UPRIGHT MEANING 

The Three of Wands is one of the tarot’s good-fortune cards. It reveals successful 
enterprise and seeing your projects and relationships thrive; it is also a great 
indicator for weddings and a new, important relationship. It predicts a busy, 
intense period of activity—so be prepared to be inundated with texts, emails, 


calls, and visitors. 

This card is often an indicator of an imminent trip away and seeing your plans 
realized—whether those are travel plans, business plans, a wedding, or other 
projects you have nurtured. This is also a time for great communication and self- 
expression through chosen interests such as art, music, crafts, and sport. The 
Three of Wands also favors individuality and nonconformism, so you may feel 
drawn to unconventional people and projects now. Also, pride yourself on your 
quirks and eccentricities, and let others see all you have to offer rather than the 
aspects of you with which you assume they are most comfortable. From this, you 
can gain even more confidence and even admiration. You are unique, after all. 

The Three’s challenge is to keep the balance between staying focused on the 
prize while remaining patient, calm, and in the now. Appreciate, too, those 
people who are around you now; try to make time for friends who don’t 
immediately fit into your future plans. 


REVERSED MEANING 

When reversed, the Three of Wands shows communication problems. Plans are 
delayed and it may be difficult to make progress in your projects. Relationships 
can suffer under this influence, as you find it hard to express yourself and 
understand what others are saying. Misunderstandings may make you feel 
needlessly isolated. If this applies to you, resist the frustration that this influence 
brings and go with a slower pace for a while. Overall, however, these are minor 
negatives; this is still a card of good fortune, even when reversed, so don’t let 
glitches become a distraction. You can still succeed. 




Element: Fire 

Astrological Association: Venus in Aries 
Number: 4 

Tree of Life Position: Chesed, the sphere of love 

Key Meanings: Freedom, creativity, and domestic happiness 




















• <990US G*mr» 




























UNDERSTANDING THE FOUR OF WANDS 


One of the happiest cards of the tarot’s minor arcana, the Four of Wands shows 
celebration. A couple stands triumphant, holding up bouquets of flowers. Four 
wands make an arbor hanging with garlands of ripe fruit—lemons, apples, 
plums, purple grapevines, and pink blooms. Three tiny figures are dancing, 
outside the walls of a city. This scene might depict harvest time, a public holiday, 
or even a wedding. The inspiration for the card may draw upon two pagan 
festivals—Beltane, or May Day, if we see the wands as maypoles, and Lammas, 
the Celtic celebration of the first day of the harvest. 

May Day, held on May 1, has its origins in the Celtic festival of Beltane, 
which celebrated the coming of spring and the end of seed-planting. Maypoles— 
tall wands—were raised in villages, where the people danced around them to 
honor fertility. A May Queen and King were crowned with flowers—much like 
the couple on the Four of Wands, who, dressed in Roman-style robes, echo the 
origins of the celebration as the Roman holiday of Florlia, or festival of flowers. 

The bright-yellow background of the card signifies solar energy, the power of 
the sun to make all life grow. It also symbolizes consciousness, in that the couple 
present themselves for all to see in public celebration. They wear blue and red 
robes, for truth and passion and the material world, respectively. The dominant 
red and yellow are similar to the colors of card I, The Magician, with his 
luminous yellow background, rose briars, and red robes, for the energy to 
manifest his desires. Strength, card VIII, has a similar palette, again for vitality 
and also, acting with conscious awareness. 

Number four is the number of stability and balance. In the passionate suit of 
wands, it denotes security, shown by the protective walls of the castle, and 
celebration. In the kabbalistic Tree of Life (see page 234), the card links with 
Chesed, the sphere of love—which is why this card is often referred to as “the 
honeymoon.” 

Astrologically, the Four of Wands is linked to the planet Venus in the sign of 
Aries. This indicates passion, spontaneity, and joie de vivre. Aries, however, can 
be dominating at times, which can make love too intense or driven. 


UPRIGHT MEANING 

This lovely card reveals success after completion—a time for reward. Socially, 
you will have the opportunity to celebrate and really enjoy yourself; the card 


predicts you will be brimming with confidence and full of vitality. You also 
establish yourself in your work and at home, completing a building or 
remodeling project or moving to a larger property. The vibe of the card is putting 
down roots, just like the wands. People around you note your willingness to be a 
pillar of the community and involve yourself in local issues and social events. In 
work, your talent is appreciated, and you are full of ideas and enthusiasm. 
Spiritually, the card shows that you share your light with others. 

This often comes up in readings to predict that a new partner or love interest 
will open their hearts and express love and affection. It is also known as the 
honey-moon card—literally, or as a time to celebrate, run free, and enjoy what 
life has to offer. It is auspicious for creativity, and artistic projects flourish under 
the uplifting influence of the Four of Wands. 


REVERSED MEANING 

When reversed, this is one of the few minor arcana cards that retains its positive 
meaning, albeit with minor irritations. You don’t get all the time you need to 
focus on doing what you love—from traveling to creative projects and 
socializing—and you may experience some disruption to plans. In this position, 
you might just be feeling invisible and not heard. However, if you are feeling too 
much like the outsider, consider if your environment is right—it’s likely that it’s 
them, not you. Overall, however, this unsettled phase will soon pass as the sunny 
aspect of the upright card prevails. 




Element: Fire 

Astrological Association: Saturn in Leo 
Number: 5 

Tree of Life Position: Geburah, the sphere of power 
Key Meanings: Competition and debates 


















**U*Q sn06«l • 










UNDERSTANDING THE FIVE OF WANDS 


The Five of Wands shows five young men at odds with one another, holding a 
wand, a symbol of the ego and passion, which links with the card’s element of 
Fire. They all have their own take on a situation, and because they are not acting 
in harmony as a group, they appear to be getting nowhere. Each is absorbed in 
his own game: one stands victorious, holding up his wand in triumph; a group of 
three crosses wands; and a fifth holds his wand over his shoulder, trying to keep 
it for himself. 

These individuals can be seen as the pages of the four minor arcana suits, 
which approach this contest of strength in different ways. The victorious youth 
in brown and the youth in green, right in the center of the fight, are fiery Pages 
of Wands; the youth in blue, holding tight to his prize and showing he can lift its 
weight, the Page of Pentacles; the aggressor in red, the Page of Swords; and the 
passive youth in blue and white, defending himself, the Page of Cups. On the 
kabbalistic Tree of Life, the sphere associated with this card is Geburah, or 
power—here, the youths make a show of their power, but to no great effect. No 
one will get hurt; as the Rider-Waite’s creator, A. E. Waite, says, “This is mimic 
warfare” and “a sham fight.” 

The twelve total buds growing from the wands symbolize budding ideas. The 
number twelve relates to Lamed, the twelfth letter of the Hebrew alphabet, which 
originally meant to goad—its pictogram represents a staff, or wand. 

Five is the number of mankind, as well as of the quintessence, or fifth 
element in alchemy. In the Five of Wands, this suggests that despite ongoing 
disorder, order can at some point be restored. Like the quintessence, the solution 
may be invisible now, but it is possible. The chaos will calm, as the next card in 
the suit sequence is the six, the number of harmony, and the meaning of that card 
is victory (see page 214). 

The card’s astrological association of Saturn in Leo presents a conflict— 

Leo’s heady highs and need to show off do not sit easily with the disciplinarian 
planet Saturn. In the Five of Wands, this brings a sense of frustration, like a fire 
trying to stay alight despite lashings of rain. 


UPRIGHT MEANING 

The traditional meaning of this Five of Wands is competition, and the message is 
to hold your position, rather than compromise. Unlike the Five of Swords, this 


card does not predict outright battle, but there will be fiery opinions and a lack of 
agreement, at least for now. Misunderstandings abound, particularly in work 
matters. You may find yourself in meetings during which everyone is talking at 
once, defending their position rather than reaching a consensus; it’s a fight just to 
be heard. 

Scheduling problems and delays to travel plans are an additional meaning, so 
double-check travel documents and emails, appointments, accounts, and 
agendas; pay close attention to any written documents. 

The Five of Wands often comes up in readings to show being surrounded by 
people with strong opinions, particularly in families; in education, it predicts that 
you will need to compete hard in tests or examinations—but you can succeed. 

On a lighter note, the card can also show competitions that are important to you, 
such as sporting events. 


REVERSED MEANING 

The reversed meaning of the Five of Wands is deception and misinformation. 
You may be mislead, so carefully consider the source of messages before you 
make assumptions; what you hear may be exaggerated or untrue. In its most 
negative aspect, the card can show dishonesty. 

In general, the Five of Wands can show you feeling stressed and in a weak 
position, and if so, it is better to keep your own counsel just for now, or at least 
be highly selective about the people you choose to trust. 

An additional meaning of the card is litigation. 




Element: Fire 

Astrological Association: Jupiter in Leo 
Number: 6 

Tree of Life Position: Tiphareth, the sphere of beauty and rebirth 

Key Meaning: Victory 












* >990 US Ga-tim SyW*m* me 











UNDERSTANDING THE SIX OF WANDS 


A young man on a white charger parades in triumph, wearing a laurel wreath, the 
Roman symbol of victory and power, echoed by the wreath tied to his wand. The 
wand through the wreath is a symbol of fertility, of hopes coming to fruition, 
echoed in the horse’s green caparison, the color of nature and new life. The steed 
is white, for purity of intention. The spectators carry five wands; they might be 
the five sparring youths from the Five of Wands, now holding their wands 
upright and orderly, focusing on celebrating the homecoming hero. One of the 
youths is facing away from us, as if standing guard over the procession, to show 
that the rider’s victory is protected and cannot be challenged. 

The horseman can also be seen as an important messenger, bringing great 
news. The youths may be footmen, making way for the rider on his course to 
deliver his message to royals or other dignitaries. He has his horse on a tight 
rein, to show that he has his element, Fire, under control. He may be exuberant, 
but there is a calmness in his victory that is gracious and stately. This attitude of 
dignity links with the card’s number, six, which stands for harmony and 
passivity. Six also has the meaning of the past creating the present and future, so 
we might also assume that the rider’s past efforts have been rewarded, which 
makes for a glowing future. 

The Tree of Life sphere associated with this card is Tiphareth, which means 
beauty and rebirth, which can be interpreted as relating to beauty, or grace, in 
victory. The card’s astrological association of Jupiter in Leo highlights 
leadership and innovation, and reveals resilience—the ability to overcome minor 
obstacles and develop a bigger and higher perspective, which is symbolized by 
the laurel wreath set high on the rider’s tall wand. 


UPRIGHT MEANING 

This card signifies deserved success. The Six of Wands is a very welcome card if 
you have been struggling recently and feeling unsure if your hard work will 
finally pay off. The card often relates to work, career, and projects and can show 
promotion and a new contract or bid; it can also reveal that an outstanding legal 
matter will go in your favor. Enjoy this happy time and don’t be afraid to share 
your accomplishment; others will support and applaud you. It’s time to bask in 
glory, be self-satisfied, and make space to celebrate, regardless of how busy you 
may be. 



In personal relationships, the card shows that feelings are declared—and will 
be well received. The card can also indicate a proposal when it appears close to 
emotion cards such as the Ace of Cups, Two of Cups, Ten of Cups, and the 
major arcana card VI, The Lovers (see pages 120, 122, 138, and 24). This 
explains the additional meaning of the Six of Wands for celebrations, such 
weddings or attending parties and degree ceremonies. 

A traditional meaning of the card is good news, which can relate to any life 
aspect—love, property, education and work, and decision-making. Look to the 
other cards that appear close to the Six of Wands in a reading to determine the 
nature of the news on the way. 


REVERSED MEANING 

Unfortunately, when the Six of Wands reverses, the reward you have hoped for 
doesn’t materialize when you need it to. But all is not lost—this is a card of 
delay rather than cancellation, so hold fast to your goals. The wait for news may 
be frustrating, but this is due to circumstances beyond your control rather than a 
reflection on your abilities. The message is to be as patient as you can, and 
distract yourself with other tasks (rather than check your emails and text 
messages every five minutes). 

The card can also show you being let down by others, which dints your 
confidence. However, as with all the tarot’s minor arcana cards, this is a passing 
phase, so try not to take such disappointments to heart. 

An additional interpretation is pride, which in the reversed position can reveal 
an arrogant, self-important individual. 


SEVEN OF WANDS 



Element: Earth 

Astrological Association: Mars in Leo 
Number: 7 

Tree of Life Position: Netzach, the sphere of endurance, instinct, and desire 
Key Meanings: Courage, effort, and challenges 














snowi 









UNDERSTANDING THE SEVEN OF WANDS 


The scale of this card is curious—a singular young man dwarfs the landscape at 
his feet. He is giant-sized, rather like Jonathan Swift’s Gulliver in Lilliput, the 
island of tiny people who ask for Gulliver’s help and then seek to punish him 
when he will not obey their immoral commands. Towering over the small land of 
hills and the river below, the youth of this Seven of Wands is certainly out of 
place. 

With both hands on the wand, he uses everything in his power to defend his 
position. Due to his size, he sees the bigger picture, and he has great ideas, 
symbolized by the five buds on his wand compared with the groups of two and 
three buds on the six wands before him. His effort is all for a good purpose—he 
is dressed in green, the color of nature, to symbolize growth, and his hose is 
orange, the color of his suit element, Fire. He is very sure of his territory, 
standing astride a river; his position and intentions are clear. Six other wands rise 
up toward him, but he is ready for the challenge. 

The card’s astrological association, Mars in Leo, brings together the warlike 
planet, Mars, with exuberant Leo, creating an unstoppable force. Leo the lion is 
also depicted in major arcana card VIII, Strength, one of the ancestor cards of 
the Seven of Wands (see Strength’s Reflections at VIII, Strength, on page 62). 
Netzach, the card’s Tree of Life sphere, stands for endurance, which the youth 
needs to avoid letting his fiery ambition burn out. The twenty total buds on the 
seven wands can be linked with the Hebrew letter Resh, which means success. 
Victory is within his grasp. 

The card’s number is the mystical number seven. Seven comprises three, the 
number of heaven, and four, the number of earth, so the challenge is to bring 
heaven down to earth—to make your dreams reality (see VII, The Chariot, page 
58). In the Seven of Wands, this reward comes from negotiation and courage— 
standing your ground. 


UPRIGHT MEANING 

The Seven of Wands reveals obstacles in your path, but you will keep going and 
overcome them. Success is in reach. The card is particularly relevant to work 
and career matters and highlights all negotiations; regardless of how difficult the 
conversation becomes, there’s a need to keep talking and stay in conversation 
until you are satisfied with the outcome. You will need to stand tall, and by being 




very clear on your position, you can win. 

There’s a noble aspect, too, about this card, and it often comes up in a reading 
to show you may be defending others, not just your own interests. In this sense, 
the Seven of Wands is the card of the advocate, and you may find you need to 
stand up for those who are not able to speak for themselves. Morality is 
important to you now, so the Seven of Wands shows you may become the 
spokesperson for a group—such as a committee or jury. The task isn’t an easy 
one, but you will persist. 

In relationships, there are hurdles, and you may need to fight for love. This 
can be only temporary, however, so by all means stand up for your relationship 
in the short-term, provided you are sure your partner will return your loyalty. 


REVERSED MEANING 

When reversed, the Seven of Wands can indicate that you doubt your purpose. 
You may struggle to be heard and may have to overcome constant obstacles— 
but now it’s unclear if it’s all going to be worthwhile. As a result, the card can 
show anxiety and hesitation. An additional meaning is feeling overwhelmed with 
continual problems, particularly if this Seven appears with the “burden” card, the 
Ten of Wands. If so, the message here is to focus on the areas where you can still 
make a difference, while accepting the things you cannot change. This applies to 
relationships, too, so ask which imperfections you can live with and which 
aspects—such as your partner’s attitude or circumstances—are nonnegotiable. 




Element: Fire 

Astrological Association: Mercury in Sagittarius 

Number: 8 

Tree of Life Position: Hod, the sphere of majesty and the mind 
Key Meanings: News and travel 














• »990US Gamn 


















UNDERSTANDING THE EIGHT OF WANDS 


The Eight of Wands shows eight wands, all with green buds, flying through a 
gray and blue sky. The scene below is very similar to that in the Ace of Wands— 
a small white dwelling on a hill with green hills and a river below. This is one of 
two minor arcana cards without people (the other is the Three of Swords), so 
there is no obvious action to interpret. This is intentional, in that the sole focus is 
the flight of the wands, giving the card its primary meaning of movement. 
Simply, we see a flight of wands, ripe with green leaves of potential, over a calm 
landscape. They may be carrying messages, like carrier pigeons, perhaps fixed to 
the lower part of the wands that are not visible in the image; perhaps they are 
spears or love’s arrows about to land. However we view these magical wands, all 
events are about to speed up. The wand motifs take up most of the card’s space, 
dominating everything below. 

The card’s astrological association is Mercury in Sagittarius. Sagittarius, the 
sign of exploration, combines with Mercury, the winged messenger, to give the 
meaning of dynamic movement and travel. An additional quality is perspective 
and insight—just what we need if we are to effectively deal with this Eight’s fast 
and varied demands. The card’s Tree of Life sphere is Hod, which relates to the 
power of the mind: Creative thinking, logic, and a sharp wit are called for. 

The card’s number is eight, which stands for both stability and renewal (see 
also card VIII, Strength, page 62). The eights in the minor arcana, as they are 
near the end of the numbered sequences, hold all our experiences up to that 
point. We have past knowledge to draw upon, which gives us wisdom and 
enables new choices—to make new contacts and find a fresh direction. 


UPRIGHT MEANING 

Along with the Ace, the Eight of Wands is one of the most positive cards of the 
suit. It brings lots of communication, so you may be inundated with emails, 
calls, and exciting offers. If you have felt held back, or stuck waiting for 
decisions, you will soon have positive news. All your projects grow wings, 
moving swiftly forward. Just be prepared for the shift; fast, frantic events will 
energize you, but you will also need to prioritize any offers. Don’t feel you have 
to say yes to everything. Choose wisely and enjoy this frenetic, exciting 
influence. 

In relationships, the Eight of Wands can bring great news about love, 


particularly if you have been separated from a partner recently or are waiting to 
hear from a potential partner. You may be traveling soon to see one another. 

Additionally, the card has often come up in readings to show the professions 
of carpentry and scaffolding—work that involves using or building a framework 


REVERSED MEANING 

When reversed, the simple meaning of the card is delay. You may have lots of 
pending work to finish and may be waiting for a particular decision that will 
unblock other ambitions, but just for now, you’ll need to be patient. It’s also 
important to be discreet about any grievances you have just now. 

In relationships, you may be finding it hard to communicate and as a result be 
drawn into petty arguments. If you have hopes for a new love, you may be 
feeling disappointed by the person’s lack of contact. Look to the surrounding 
cards for indictors as to what this means; negative cards such as the Three or Ten 
of Swords or The Lovers reversed (see pages 180, 194, and 54) suggest that this 
potential relationship may not get off the ground. More positive cards, such as 
the upright Lovers or the Ace, Two, Six, Nine, or Ten of Cups (see pages 54, 

120, 122, 136, and 138), say that there is still hope you’ll connect again. 

An additional meaning of the reversed card is jealousy. 


NINE OF WANDS 



Element: Fire 

Astrological Association: Moon in Sagittarius 
Number: 9 

Tree of Life Position: Yesod, the sphere of foundation and the unconscious 
mind 


Key Meanings: Defense and strength 




















• 1990 U & Game* SyUem Inc 





































UNDERSTANDING THE NINE OF WANDS 


A wounded man is on the lookout. Among eight protective wands, symbols of 
his resources and responsibilities, he holds a ninth tightly with both hands, like a 
weapon. The other eight wands are orderly, as if standing at attention, ready for 
any eventuality. 

He has positioned himself on a man-made platform, which relates to his Tree 
of Life sphere, Yesod, or foundation. He has a solid base from which to operate. 
The platform also sets our would-be warrior away from the green hills behind 
him; he needs to be a little detached from society so he can better see the 
approach of potential opponents. And physically, this defender is not to be taken 
lightly. With his powerful build, he symbolizes strength and endurance; from 
experience, he has learned to expect challenges to his position, and his past 
battles are symbolized by the bandage worn around his head. This injury doesn’t 
deter him, and he almost wears it like a bandana, with pride. 

The card’s astrological association, Moon in Sagittarius, shows great 
resilience and strength of character—it combines the sensitive mind, the Moon, 
with the Sagittarian qualities of directness, perception, and the willingness to 
take risks. This combination may also reveal a need to explore hidden factors, to 
dig deep to get to the truth. 

The card’s number is nine, comprising three sets of three. Three is a dynamic 
number, and when multiplied by itself, symbolizes intense productivity. It also 
holds the threes as a symbol of the integration of mind, body, and spirit. In the 
Nine of Wands, all the wands of the previous suit cards accumulate. This reflects 
the wisdom of experience, but also the responsibility of accrued demands and 
pressure that is expressed in card Ten, “the burden.” By keeping his wands in 
order in the Nine, the inevitable buildup of untenable demands expressed in the 
Ten can be avoided. 


UPRIGHT MEANING 

The upright Nine of Wands shows that you are in a very strong position. You 
have fought long and hard to get where you are, and have endured heavy 
challenges, particularly in work. Being constantly vigilant and ingenious can be 
exhausting, however, so use your energy wisely; plan all activities meticulously 
and don’t overexert yourself, and you will have all the resources you need to see 
you through. Thankfully, as with all minor arcana cards, this influence will not 



last forever. You won’t always need to defend yourself to this degree, or make so 
many sacrifices. 

This card also highlights the fine balance between being adequately defended 
and being defensive. While it’s appropriate to establish and protect your 
boundaries, defensiveness keeps you in a negative mind-set; the Nine often 
comes up in a reading to show a person who is fearful that his or her idea or 
other work will be stolen—but this is just a perception rather than reality. It can 
also show an unwillingness to hand in an assignment or to make your work 
public in some other way due to fear of rejection or criticism. If so, it’s time to 
let go—you have worked hard, and your efforts will meet with appreciation and 
support. 


REVERSED MEANING 

When the Nine of Wands is reversed, you endure strong opposition, which seems 
unfair. You put in hard work—but receive little thanks in return. You give your 
all, but it still doesn’t seem to be enough, so you may be at the mercy of an 
unreasonable boss or demanding children, friends, or clients. This situation is 
demotivating, so you become fixed on getting through tasks without enjoying the 
aspects of your work that used to be satisfying. Equally, you could be the one 
who is obstinate and inflexible in your attitude. 

The reversed card can also show issues with boundaries. Someone may be 
invading your territory. In relationships, you may be dealing with an individual 
who is acting defensively because you are veering into uncomfortable territory 
for them. 



TEN OF WANDS 



Element: Fire 

Astrological Association: Saturn in Sagittarius 

Number: 10 

Tree of Life Position: Malkuth, the Kingdom, the sphere of experience 
Key Meanings: Responsibilities and a burden 
















z 


snoMi > 
















UNDERSTANDING THE TEN OF WANDS 


A blond man is striding toward a house he can’t see. He knows it is there— 
perhaps he has visited before, which might explain his confident step. There’s an 
element of desperation here, too: Why would he choose to be so uncomfortable 
and sightless on his journey? He even chooses to hold his wands so his right 
hand is in front of his eyes, further blocking the view. Perhaps he sees himself as 
less than human, a blind beast desperate to release its burden. 

The man’s determination to arrive at his destination is symbolized by his 
orange tunic, representing his suit’s element of Fire, for passion and energy. And 
the destination looks worthwhile: We see fertile lands, with rolling hills, trees, 
and a field ploughed and ready for planting—maybe his ten wands will grow 
there into strong trees. To the right is a manor house, symbolizing that hard work 
now will pay off in the future if our laborer can endure the load and keep going. 
This links with the card’s astrological association of Saturn in Sagittarius; 
Sagittarius’s need for freedom and travel is eclipsed by the dour taskmaster 
planet, Saturn. In this sense, the Ten of Wands suggests the struggle between 
grinding work and keeping our dreams alive. 

In numerology, the number ten represents completeness and perfection. In the 
Ten of Wands, however, the impact of ten wands of Fire is exhausting, both 
emotionally and financially. The individual sphere associated with this card is 
Malkuth, for kingdom—so the Ten of Wands in this sense suggests taking on the 
whole kingdom, or world, which can be both a burden and a burning ambition. 


UPRIGHT MEANING 

The upright Ten of Wands reveals that you are carrying too much on your 
shoulders just now. You may have become so used to being overloaded that 
you’ve lost sight of the reason you’re doing the work. It’s a common card for 
homemakers and entrepreneurs, those of you who must multitask and constantly 
respond to a wide range of demands. Consider saying no to any future requests 
and decide which projects or jobs you can stop or hand over to someone else. 
There’s a real need here for delegation and support from others. No one expects 
you to carry this on your own, and this goes for emotional burdens, too—they 
need to be shared. The card can also suggest that you may be carrying issues 
from the past. On a more positive note, the card reveals that you can be 
successful, albeit with careful management of time and resources. 



This card can show up in a reading to reveal that you may need to look for 
less demanding work, but you feel too drained by your present job to spend time 
searching. This puts you in a catch-22: The situation can’t change until you pull 
back from current responsibilities and invest what energy you possess into 
changing your circumstances. The Ten of Wands can also show that relationships 
are neglected because all your attention is on work. 

Also note that if the Ten of Wands comes up as the you/situation card in a 
reading, you or the person you are reading for may not be receptive to the 
reading simply because too much is going on. Lay the cards again or wait three 
days. 


REVERSED MEANING 

When reversed, the card’s meaning is very similar to that of the upright card, 
except that some of the burdens may be more perceived than real. This may be a 
sign of ongoing stress, where every task gets framed as a potential problem. The 
message here is to try to lighten up a little and take some of the pressure off 
yourself—you don’t need to be perfect. Obstinacy is one of the card’s meanings, 
so do ask yourself if you have created too much self-pressure, fixating on 
impossible goals. 

The reversed card can also show you being caught in an exhausting grind 
between work and domestic commitments because you are trying to keep 
everyone happy. Make a vow to make some space for your own needs—you 
need to please yourself, too. When you can do this, you’ll see the way ahead 
more clearly. 




Element: Earth of the suit of Fire 

Key Meanings: Good news and communication 

















PAGE .» WANDS. 




— 


snoMi • 


















UNDERSTANDING THE PAGE OF WANDS 


The Page of Wands is looking upward toward the top of his wand, out of which 
are growing tiny leaf buds. The red plume on his hat looks like a flame, linking 
with the element of his suit—he is burning with ambition. The Page’s tall wand 
is higher than him, showing that his ideas are greater than his experience, but he 
is inspired to overcome any shortfall in his knowledge with enthusiasm. His 
passion will propel him forward as he sees the potential in everything. 

The card’s element is Earth of Fire, which is the most grounded aspect of the 
passionate Fire element of this suit. The Earth and Fire elements combine in the 
pyramids, to the right of the picture—they comprise a square base (the square is 
an Earth symbol) and triangular sides (the triangle is a symbol of Fire). The 
pyramids also signify grand design, establishment, and wisdom—to which our 
ingenue Page aspires. He wears orange hose, the color of his Fire element, and a 
tunic decorated with black salamanders, creatures with legendary fireproof skin. 
The yellow background of the tunic fabric and the trim of the Page’s boots echo 
the yellow tunic of the Fool (see page 30), who too aims to set the world alight. 

The Page’s wand, with its five buds, echoes nature and growth. He may be in 
an arid desert land, but he has the resources to succeed. 

Pages and Knights in tarot are generally regarded as people or influences, 
whereas the other court cards (the Queens and Kings) are assumed to be people. 
Fet your intuition guide you toward the most appropriate meaning for the Page 
in a reading by working with the card’s imagery first, then the written 
interpretations here (see also the Introduction, page 8). 


UPRIGHT MEANING 

As an influence: The Page of Wands in a reading brings good news about 
projects and any situation that requires negotiation. Messages, urgent emails, and 
phone calls keep you busy and may be demanding, but cool the fire a little and 
take a measured view before you react and assess just how much work you need 
to do. The atmosphere overall, however, is one of trust, and you can rely upon 
information you receive. Pages, with their youth, suggest young, or new, 
situations, from relationships to work. 

The Page of Wands can bring a creative enterprise or job offer—and, while 
the status of the job may not be as high as you might expect, the overall package 
may appeal, at least in theory. Do, however, check the details and practicalities 


before you agree to anything. 

As a person: A talkative, entertaining individual, the Page of Wands often 
turns up in reading to denote a writer. His wand is his pen, his way to express 
himself in the world at large. Equally, he may be a marketing executive, 
salesperson, actor, or team manager—any role that relies on personality and 
great communication skills. This Page is a hard worker, dedicated and 
enthusiastic, and charming company. He can influence others—just be aware 
that he can get bored easily and move on to whatever attracts him next (so if you 
see him as a potential lover, note his actions as well as his words). An additional 
interpretation of the Page is a reunion with a friend or old colleague with whom 
you will enjoy chatting and reminiscing. 

As the “you” card in a reading: Express yourself. 

As an influence: If two or more Pages fall close together in a reading, the 
meanings are as follows: 

& Two Pages: Friendship if upright; rivalry if one or both cards are reversed 

Three Pages: Lots of social activities 
& Four Pages: A social group of young people 


REVERSED MEANING 

When reversed, the Page of Wands brings delays. Emails and other messages go 
astray and communication gets complicated. As a person, the Page reversed talks 
much like his upright counterpart, but the theme of the conversation is negative 
and rather relentless. As the upright Page holds fast to his goals, so the reversed 
Page won’t let a morose subject drop. The card can also show stubbornness and 
an inability to listen to others’ opinions. 

This Page is fickle and does not follow through what he initiates. Eventually, 
his enthusiasm or obsessions burn out, he becomes easily bored or distracted, 
and he leaves you to deal with any fallout. 

An additional meaning is problems with literacy and can apply to a child or 
young person struggling with written communication or speech. 


KNIGHT OF WANDS 



Element: Fire of Fire 

Astrological Associations: Scorpio and Sagittarius 
Key Meaning: A proposal 

















KNIGHT,* WANDS. 


tWO U S Gams 

















UNDERSTANDING THE KNIGHT OF WANDS 


Ahorse appears to be dancing in the desert, near some pyramids. There’s a 
flamboyant rider, full of verve and vigor; holding a wand, this Knight is on a 
mission to deliver a message. 

The card’s element is Fire of the suit of Fire. Fire doubled is a hot mix of 
passion, ambition, and desire, expressed in many of the card’s motifs. The 
horse’s mane and the Knight’s red plume, sleeve, and saddle resemble flames; 
the three pyramids on the left of the card, with their triangular sides, link with 
the Fire element; and the Knight’s tunic has a pattern of black salamanders, the 
creatures with legendary fireproof skin (see the Page of Wands, page 224). The 
wand itself can be seen as a torch, the carrier of a flame. The yellow tunic stands 
for the light of the sun, or the mind and conscious illumination. 

Although the card’s imagery speaks of fiery ambition and desire, there’s no 
sense of chaos, danger, or imminent battle. The horse’s reins are short and tight, 
which at first glance gives the impression that the horse is dancing or performing 
dressage. The Knight has control over the primal urges of the animal and knows 
when to give free rein and when to hold back. 

The wand has no flame, but it is living wood, sprouting five buds, symbols of 
news and ideas. The number five in the tarot’s minor arcana suits also indicates 
tests—with the Knight of Wands, the test is to control fiery impulses and manage 
our energy and talent to achieve success, much like the charioteer of card VII, 
The Chariot (see page 58). The three, the number of pyramids on the card, is a 
dynamic number, for creativity and production (see also card III, The Empress, 
page 42). 

Knights and Pages in tarot are generally regarded as people or influences, 
whereas the other court cards (the Queens and Kings) are assumed to be people. 
Let your intuition guide you toward the most appropriate meaning for the Knight 
in a reading by working with the card’s imagery first, then the written 
interpretations here (see also the Introduction, page 8). 


UPRIGHT MEANING 

As an influence: Events speed up. Any blocks to progress will be lifted, so this 
is a welcome card if you have been waiting for decisions or have generally been 
feeling stuck. You can now have the conversations and action you need to move 
your projects on; follow your intuition and push forward. This card is 


particularly auspicious for moving house, finding new work, and making 
progress on personal and professional projects. 

In readings, this Knight often appears to predict a successful writing project. 
In other creative pursuits, you attract acknowledgment and support, both 
emotionally and financially. 

An additional meaning of the card is travel and emigration. 

As a person: Creative and dynamic, the Knight of Wands is an innovator and 
likes to do things his way. He inspires those around him and is excellent at 
networking to promote his ideas. He may be a traveler or visitor, and he will 
have had many experiences and stories to tell. He is, however, impatient to get 
things done and can make snap judgments about people based on first 
impressions. As a potential partner, he can show a charismatic, talkative 
individual who may take things a little too fast at first. 

As the “you” card in a reading: Fire up your ambition. 

As an influence: If two or more Knights fall close together in a reading, the 
meanings are as follows: 

& Two Knights: Friendship if upright; rivalry if one or both cards are reversed 
& Three Knights: Men meeting up 
& Four Knights: Lots of action; events speed up 


REVERSED MEANING 

In general, the reversed Knight of Wands reveals a creative block or 
miscommunication—so emails go astray and other messages are not delivered. 
The reversed Knight also indicates delays and deferred decisions; you may feel 
frustrated at the lack of progress. Know that this influence is temporary and will 
pass. In the meantime, hold fast to your plans and your self-belief. 

As a person, the reversed Knight is egotistical. He thrives on status but is 
generally unwilling to do any hard work to deserve it; regardless, he will step up 
to take the credit. Insincere and attention-seeking, he acts out of self-interest. 


QUEEN OF WANDS 



Element: Water of the suit of Fire 
Astrological Associations: Pisces and Aries 

Chakras: Sacral, throat, and third eye, for creativity, communication and insight 
Key Meanings: Creativity and focus 



















QUEEN ^V/ANDS. 


• '990 U S Gwnm SytMmi. loc 














UNDERSTANDING THE QUEEN OF WANDS 

The Queen of Wands is an aspect of card III, The Empress, or mother archetype. 
She is the soul aspect of the mother, just as The Queen of Cups is the heart 
aspect and the Queen of Swords, the mind (see pages 144, 200, and The 
Empress, page 42). 

The most vital of the four Queens, the Queen of Wands sits directly facing us, 
holding a tall wand, her suit symbol of creativity and purpose. Like the Magician 
(see page 34), she manifests her ideas to follow her soul’s path. The wood of the 
wand is alive with green shoots; it is the Queen’s job to see them thrive. In her 
left hand is a sunflower, a solar symbol for energy, growth, and illumination. 
Three tiny buds shoot from the upper part of the wand. Three is a dynamic 
number of creation, and also the number of her ancestor card, the Empress. 

The red-haired Queen’s suit element is Fire, shown in many motifs on her 
card. Robed in gold, her throne is decorated with sunflowers and heraldic lions 
in orange, the color of flames. Low pyramids appear to her left. The triangle 
shape of the pyramids is a symbol for Fire in alchemy, and these ancient 
structures also offer a metaphor for this Queen’s strong foundation in the world. 

Along with Fire, her suit element, the Queen also takes Water, the element of 
all the Queens. The combination of Fire and Water reveals the careful balancing 
of emotion and ideas to create conditions for success. Both practical and 
cerebral, she is highly resourceful, knowing when to draw upon her Fire energy 
to take action or attune to her Water emotions to show sensitivity to her 
environment and others’ needs. 

In esoteric tarot, the Queen of Wands is associated with the leopard, but in the 
Rider-Waite deck, she is shown with a black cat, a sign of magic—the witch’s 
familiar. The statuary lions on each side of her throne symbolize Sekhmet, an 
ancient Egyptian lioness deity associated with Bastet, depicted originally as a 
lioness and later as a cat. The Queen of Wands wears a red cat brooch at her 
heart, a Bastet amulet, which symbolizes power, protection, and pleasure. 

Queens and Kings in tarot are traditionally regarded as people in your life or 
people about to come into your orbit. However, you can also read the Queen as a 
general influence, so this interpretation is included last. 


UPRIGHT MEANING 

As a person: This Queen is often the card of the artisan, entrepreneur, counselor, 


organizer, or leader—the writer, producer, marketer, or business administrator: 
whatever relies upon spark and communication for success. Sociable and 
supportive, she is intensely loyal, just like her associated sign of Aries. This self- 
aware Queen is also in touch with her intuition, so she makes good choices in 
relationships. The Queen of Wands often loves nature and animals, too. 

As an influence: Ideas flourish, and you can now show others what you can 
do. This is no time for reticence; fire up your enthusiasm and express yourself. 
Reflect, also, on how you are managing your life just now, to make sure you 
have the time to make space for the opportunities coming your way. Overall, 
though, the Queen of Wands shows you will have the strength you need, and 
your relationships, too, are energized—romance, friendships, family ties, and 
professional contacts. 

As the “you” card in a reading: Step in to your power. 

As an influence: If two or more Queens fall close together in a reading, the 
meanings are as follows: 

v'v Two Queens: Rivalry 
& Three Queens: Helpful friends 
& Four Queens: Women meeting up 


REVERSED MEANING 

You may feel controlled when the Queen of Wands reverses due to others’ 
pointless interference. There is a great need for organization—but disorder rules. 
This may be because you, or someone close, has taken on too much and cannot 
admit it. Consider if this is a pattern—a way of avoiding being who you are, due 
to fear of rejection. 

As a person, the reversed Queen of Wands breaks promises. She can be 
envious and does not want anyone around her to shine more brightly. 


KING OF WANDS 



Element: Air of the suit of Fire 
Astrological Associations: Cancer and Leo 

Chakras: The sacral, throat, and third eye, for creativity, communication, and 
insight 

Key Meaning: An honorable man 























KING oV WANL 


• 1 WO U S Ootws 















UNDERSTANDING THE KING OF WANDS 


The King of Wands is an aspect of card IV, The Emperor, or father archetype, 
who brings structure, order, and authority. The King of Wands is the father- 
aspect of the Emperor who offers inspiration and communication. 

The King’s robe and the back of his throne are decorated with black 
salamanders, the creatures who have legendary fireproof skin (see also the 
Knight and Page of Wands, pages 226 and 224). A live salamander appears to 
the right of the card to reinforce its importance as a symbol of the King’s suit 
element of Fire. Lions also decorate the throne, and the King wears a lion-head 
amulet around his neck, a symbol of strength and protection linking with one of 
his zodiac signs, Leo the Lion. 

His wand has four buds, which relate to the number of his ancestor card IV, 
The Emperor, and also symbolizes the four elements. His crown, cuffs, and cape 
have flame motifs, and he wears a fiery orange robe and cloak. His cap is red— 
at first glance, it would appear he has red hair, but this is actually called a “cap 
of maintenance,” worn by nobility and the other three minor arcana Kings (see 
pages 146, 176, and 198), that fits under a crown. Red and orange denote passion 
in the real world—or fiery ambition. 

The card’s element is Air of Fire, which can be interpreted as fire that 
breathes. The more air a fire has to burn, the brighter the fire and higher the 
flames. This also reveals the King’s challenge: to keep feeding his desires 
without burning himself out. The green of his cowl and shoes symbolizes nature 
and wood, which feeds a fire, so he is mindful that to thrive, he needs to be in a 
productive, supportive environment. 

Kings and Queens in tarot are traditionally regarded as people in your life or 
people about to come into your orbit. However, you can also read the King as a 
general influence, so this interpretation is included last. 


UPRIGHT MEANING 

As a person: This King of Wands is a man of the world, and it’s likely that he 
has traveled widely, experiencing many cultures and countries. Talkative and 
energetic, his ideal vocations include business and management, 
communications and marketing, the travel industry, acting, and other roles that 
depend on self-motivation and individuality. He may be self-employed, running 
a business or acting as a freelance consultant. 


His has wisdom, very high standards that he applies to himself and those 
around him, and strong integrity. Courteous and considerate, he stays true to his 
values and acts according to his moral code. He is open and self-aware and does 
not judge other people on their backgrounds or beliefs; he often learns by 
listening to people talk about their experiences. As a free spirit, he respects 
others who don’t conform. As a potential partner, he is passionate and 
communicative. 

As an influence: This is the right time to express your ideas and be the 
individual you are. Summon your entrepreneurial spirit, make a plan, and what 
you propose will be well received. The practical support you need will be there, 
but you need to be the initiator. What you do now reflects your truth. Don’t let 
perfectionism get in the way of your creativity—what you do is more than good 
enough. 

As the “you” card in a reading: Be a free spirit. 

As an influence: If two or more Kings fall close together in a reading, the 
meanings are as follows: 

"«?>" Two Kings: A good partnership 
& Three Kings: Influential men 
& Four Kings: A power battle 


REVERSED MEANING 

This card reversed indicates a time of restriction when you can’t get others to see 
your point of view. Equally, check that you’re not going against your intuition if 
you feel you’re not following the right path—drop the self-pressure and be open 
to alternative routes. 

Bullying, selfish, and opinionated, the reversed King as a person is narrow¬ 
minded and obsessive about rules. He can be an overbearing manager or a strict 
parental figure. He does not want to listen to anyone who doesn’t agree with 
him, and full of self-interest, he is determined to get his own way. 


AFTERWORD 


T hank you for spending time with me as you’ve worked through, or dipped 
into, these pages. My aim throughout has been to offer you the information 
you need, while encouraging you to read tarot your way, developing your 
own style and personal relationship with your cards. 

While this book may launch you toward or, in some cases, invite you more 
deeply into the magical world of tarot, experience is our best teacher: It is only 
with experience that we trust the words on the page and ourselves, and are able 
to put everything into practice. 

The first tarot book I bought was The Tarot by Alfred Douglas. Twenty-five 
years after purchasing it, I had the pleasure of meeting Alfred Douglas at the UK 
Tarot Conference, and was able to thank him personally and give him one of my 
tarot decks. I’d like to thank him again here for the book that inspired me to take 
the cards into my own hands. 

It is my hope that The Ultimate Guide to Tarot inspires you, too, to try tarot 
for yourself, to share it with others, to trust your intuition, and to embrace the 
insights of tarot as a path not only to divination but also as a way to appreciate 
ourselves and our world more intimately. 




APPENDICES 


APPENDIX A 

Astrology, Kabbala, and the Major Arcana: The Golden 
Dawn System 


CARD 
ELEMENT 
SIGN OR PLANET 

TREE OF LIFE 
PATHWAY 

HEBREW LETTER 

CARD 

ELEMENT 

SIGN OR PLANET 

TREE OF LIFE 
PATHWAY 

HEBREW LETTER 

CARD 

ELEMENT 

SIGN OR PLANET 

TREE OF LIFE 
PATHWAY 

HEBREW LETTER 


0 The Fool 


Air 


Uranus* 


1 


A ( Aleph ) 


I The Magician 


Air 


Mercury 


2 


B (Beth) 


II The High Priestess 


Water 


Moon 


3 


G ( Gimel ) 


III The Empress 


CARD 































ELEMENT 


SIGN OR PLANET 

Venus 

TREE OF LIFE 
PATHWAY 

4 

HEBREW LETTER 

D ( Daleth ) 

CARD 

IV The Emperor 

ELEMENT 

Fire 

SIGN OR PLANET 

Aries 

TREE OF LIFE 
PATHWAY 

5 

HEBREW LETTER 

H ( Hei ) 

CARD 

V The Hierophant 

ELEMENT 

Earth 

SIGN OR PLANET 

Taurus 

TREE OF LIFE 
PATHWAY 

6 

HEBREW LETTER 

U, V (Vcni) 

CARD 

VI The Lovers 

ELEMENT 

Air 

SIGN OR PLANET 

Gemini 

TREE OF LIFE 
PATHWAY 

7 

HEBREW LETTER 

Z ( Zain ) 

CARD 

VII The Chariot 

ELEMENT 

Water 

SIGN OR PLANET 

Cancer 


TREE OF LIFE 






























PATHWAY 


HEBREW LETTER 
CARD 
ELEMENT 
SIGN OR PLANET 

TREE OF LIFE 
PATHWAY 

HEBREW LETTER 

CARD 

ELEMENT 

SIGN OR PLANET 

TREE OF LIFE 
PATHWAY 

HEBREW LETTER 

CARD 

ELEMENT 

SIGN OR PLANET 

TREE OF LIFE 
PATHWAY 

HEBREW LETTER 

CARD 

ELEMENT 

SIGN OR PLANET 

TREE OF LIFE 
PATHWAY 

HEBREW LETTER 


8 


Ch ( Heth ) 

VIII Strength 

Fire 

Leo 

9 

T( Teth ) 

IX The Hermit 

Earth 

Virgo 

10 

I, Y ( Yod ) 

X The Wheel of Fortune 

Fire 

Jupiter 

11 

K ( Kaph ) 

XI Justice 

Air 

Libra 

12 

L (Lamed) 






























CARD 

XII The Hanged Man 

ELEMENT 

Water 

SIGN OR PLANET 

Neptune* 

TREE OF LIFE 
PATHWAY 

13 

HEBREW LETTER 

M (Mem) 

CARD 

XIII Death 

ELEMENT 

Water 

SIGN OR PLANET 

Scorpio 

TREE OF LIFE 
PATHWAY 

14 

HEBREW LETTER 

N (Nun) 

CARD 

XIV Temperance 

ELEMENT 

Fire 

SIGN OR PLANET 

Sagittarius 

TREE OF LIFE 
PATHWAY 

15 

HEBREW LETTER 

S (Samekh) 

CARD 

XV The Devil 

ELEMENT 

Earth 

SIGN OR PLANET 

Capricorn 

TREE OF LIFE 
PATHWAY 

16 

HEBREW LETTER 

O (Ayin) 

CARD 

XVI The Tower 

ELEMENT 

Fire 
































SIGN OR PLANET 

Mars 

TREE OF LIFE 
PATHWAY 

17 

HEBREW LETTER 

P ( Peh ) 

CARD 

XVII The Star 

ELEMENT 

Air 

SIGN OR PLANET 

Aquarius 

TREE OF LIFE 
PATHWAY 

18 

HEBREW LETTER 

Tz ( Tzaddi ) 

CARD 

XVIII The Moon 

ELEMENT 

Water 

SIGN OR PLANET 

Pisces 

TREE OF LIFE 
PATHWAY 

19 

HEBREW LETTER 

Q (Qoph) 

CARD 

XIX The Sun 

ELEMENT 

Fire 

SIGN OR PLANET 

Sun 

TREE OF LIFE 
PATHWAY 

20 

HEBREW LETTER 

R ( Resh ) 

CARD 

XX Judgment 

ELEMENT 

Fire 

SIGN OR PLANET 

Pluto* 

TREE OF LIFE 
PATHWAY 

21 
































HEBREW LETTER 


CARD 

ELEMENT 

SIGN OR PLANET 

TREE OF LIFE 
PATHWAY 

HEBREW LETTER 


Sh (Tav) 


XXI The World 


Earth 


Saturn 


22 


Th (Tau) 


* The astrological associations initially linked the cards with the seven 
classical planets: the Sun, Moon, Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter, and 
Saturn. Uranus, Neptune, and Pluto were later additions. 




















APPENDIX B 

Kabbala: The Tree of Life Pathways and the Major 
Arcana 

Each major arcana card is linked with a pathway on the Tree of Life, the major 
motif of Kabbala. 

1 Kether, the sphere of divine light 

2 Chockmah, the sphere of wisdom 

3 Binah, the sphere of understanding 

4 Chesed, the sphere of love 

5 Geburah, the sphere of power and judgment 

6 Tiphareth, the sphere of beauty and rebirth 

7 Netzach, the sphere of endurance, instinct, and desire 

8 Hod, the sphere of majesty and the mind 

9 Yesod, the sphere of foundation and the unconscious mind 

10 Malkuth, the Kingdom, the sphere of experience 




The Tree comprises ten sephirots, or spheres, that describe aspects of our spiritual experience on earth; 
understanding a card's Tree of Life pathway gives more depth to its meaning. 







APPENDIX C 

Astrology, Kabbala, and the Minor Arcana 


THE ASTROLOGICAL SIGNS OF THE KNIGHTS 
QUEENS, AND KINGS 


Knight of Wands 
Queen of Wands 
King of Wands 
Knight of Cups 
Queen of Cups 
King of Cups 
Knight of Pentacles 
Queen of Pentacles 
King of Pentacles 
Knight of Swords 
Queen of Swords 
King of Swords 


Scorpio and Sagittarius 
Pisces and Aries 
Cancer and Leo 
Aquarius and Pisces 
Gemini and Cancer 
Libra and Scorpio 
Leo and Virgo 
Sagittarius and Capricorn 
Aries and Taurus 
Taurus and Gemini 
Virgo and Libra 
Capricorn and Aquarius 


TREE OF LIFE CORRESPONDENCES 


Aces: Kether 
Twos: Chockmah 
Threes: Binah 
Fours: Chesed 
Fives: Geburah 
Sixes: Tiphareth 
Sevens: Netzach 
Eights: Hod 
Nines: Yesod 
Tens: Malkuth 



APPENDIX D 

Chakras, Crystals, and the Major Arcana 


I have attributed a chakra and crystal to each major arcana card. These 
attributions are my own and relate to my personal experience of tarot and 
healing work. You may have alternative suggestions or attachments. 

Along with the seven principal chakras—the base, sacral, solar plexus, heart, 
throat, third eye, and crown—I refer to the new chakras becoming available to us 
during this time of spiritual shift: the higher heart, for universal love; the alta 
major chakra, for past lives; the palm chakras, for manifesting; the angelic, or 
fifth-eye chakra, for spiritual activation; the fourth eye, for spiritual connection; 
the heart seed, for soul remembrance; the soul star, for soul connection; the earth 
star, for spiritual grounding; and the stellar gateway, or cosmic doorway. 

Tarot cards also have crystal attributions, and again, these largely depend on 
the author’s preference. You can also allocate your own crystals to the cards. 


TAROT CRYSTAL RITUALS 

Crystals magnify and balance the energies of their associated tarot card. For 
example, if you want to manifest more abundance in your life, select the 
Magician from your deck and place one of his crystals on the card and then 
display the card and crystal where you can see them when you are working to 
make your projects happen. If you are experiencing the confusing, destructive 
impact of the Tower, carry a red camelian in your pocket or bag to help you feel 
more secure. 

The crystals listed on page 237 are those traditionally associated with each 
chakra point, along with some that are my personal suggestions. 


THE BODY’S CHAKRA POINTS 

There are seven principal chakra points on the body. As we ascend to higher 
levels of consciousness, new or “developing” chakras open up. 


0 > Stellar Gateway 

0 • Soul Star 


o 


Fourth Eye 



Sacral 


Fifth Eye, or Angelic 


Alta Major (back of the neck) 


Higher Heart 


Heart Seed 


Solar Plexus 


Crown 


Third Eye 


Throat 


Heart 


Base or Root 


Earth Star 
























THE SEVEN PRINCIPAL CHAKRAS 

Base or Root: security 
Sacral: creativity 
Solar Plexus: energy and wisdom 
Heart: love and relationships 
Throat: communication 
Third Eye: intuition 

Crown: connection with guides and the spiritual realms 
















THE DEVELOPING CHAKRAS 

Stellar Gateway: cosmic connection 
Soul Star: karma and soul wisdom 
Fourth Eye: spiritual direction 
Fifth Eye, or Angelic: angelic contact 

Alta Major (back of the neck): past lives, expanding consciousness 

Higher Heart: universal love; the seat of the soul 

Heart Seed: soul memory 

Earth Star: grounding and connection 
















TAROT, CHAKRA, AND CRYSTAL 
CORRESPONDENCES 


MAJOR ARCANA CARD 

0 The Fool 

CHAKRA 

Crown Base 

CRYSTALS 

Clear quartz Red carnelian and red jasper 

MAJOR ARCANA CARD 

I The Magician 

CHAKRA 

Palm chakras 

CRYSTALS 

Aquamarine and fire agate 

MAJOR ARCANA CARD 

II The High Priestess 

CHAKRA 

Angelic (fifth eye) 

CRYSTALS 

Lavender quartz, selenite, and moonstone 

MAJOR ARCANA CARD 

III The Empress 

CHAKRA 

Heart Sacral 

CRYSTALS 

Rose quartz, emerald Orange carnelian and orange calcite 

MAJOR ARCANA CARD 

IV The Emperor 

CHAKRA 

Base 

CRYSTALS 

Red jasper, red calcite, and garnet 

MAJOR ARCANA CARD 

V The Hierophant 

CHAKRA 

Fourth eye 

CRYSTALS 

Apophylite, celestite, and sapphire 

MAJOR ARCANA CARD 

VI The Lovers 

CHAKRA 

Heart 


Aventurine, agate, and rose quartz 



































CRYSTALS 


MAJOR ARCANA CARD 
CHAKRA 
CRYSTALS 

MAJOR ARCANA CARD 
CHAKRA 
CRYSTALS 

MAJOR ARCANA CARD 
CHAKRA 
CRYSTALS 

MAJOR ARCANA CARD 
CHAKRA 
CRYSTALS 

MAJOR ARCANA CARD 
CHAKRA 
CRYSTALS 

MAJOR ARCANA CARD 
CHAKRA 
CRYSTALS 

MAJOR ARCANA CARD 
CHAKRA 
CRYSTALS 

MAJOR ARCANA CARD 
CHAKRA 


VII The Chariot 

Throat 

Blue lace agate 

VIII Strength 

Solar plexus 

Citrine and tiger’s eye 

IX The Hermit 

Heart seed 

Tugtupite 

X The Wheel of Fortune 

Soul star 

White topaz 

XI Justice 

Earth star 

Hematite, obsidian, and bloodstone 

XII The Hanged Man 

Third eye 

Amethyst and sapphire 

XIII Death 

Alta major 

Blue moonstone 

XIV Temperance 

Solar plexus 
































CRYSTALS 

Citrine, amber, and yellow topaz 

MAJOR ARCANA CARD 

XV The Devil 

CHAKRA 

Base chakra 

CRYSTALS 

Carnelian and ruby 

MAJOR ARCANA CARD 

XVI The Tower 

CHAKRA 

Crown Base 

CRYSTALS 

Clear quartz Red carnelian, and red jasper 

MAJOR ARCANA CARD 

XVII The Star 

CHAKRA 

Higher heart 

CRYSTALS 

Kunzite, dioptase, and red tourmaline 

MAJOR ARCANA CARD 

XVIII The Moon 

CHAKRA 

Third eye 

CRYSTALS 

Amethyst and lapis lazuli 

MAJOR ARCANA CARD 

XIX The Sun 

CHAKRA 

Solar plexus 

CRYSTALS 

Citrine and golden topaz 

MAJOR ARCANA CARD 

XX Judgment 

CHAKRA 

Alta major 

CRYSTALS 

Blue moonstone 

MAJOR ARCANA CARD 

XXI The World 

CHAKRA 

Stellar gateway 

CRYSTALS 

Lemurian seedquartz 





































ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 


With thanks to: my agent, Chelsey Fox; my editors, Jill Alexander, Renae 
Haines, and Leah Jenness; my husband, Michael Young; and special tarot friends 
Kay Stopforth and Christina Archbold; and in memory of Jonathan Dee, mentor 
extraordinaire, and the much-missed Marjorie Birchnall. 




ABOUT THE AUTHOR 


Liz Dean is a tarot teacher and professional tarot reader working with the Rider- 
Waite deck at Psychic Sisters in Selfridges, London. A former editor with a 
twenty-five-year career in illustrated book publishing, Liz is the author of seven 
divination decks and books, including The Victorian Steampunk Tarot, Fairy 
Tale Fortune Cards, 44 Ways to Talk to Your Angels, The Golden Tarot, The 
Mystery of the Tarot, The Love Tarot, and the 300,000-copy bestseller The Art of 
Tarot. Liz was recently featured in Tarot Masters, a collection of thirty-eight 
essays by workshop leaders and speakers from the UK Tarot Conference. 

Liz is also an Angelic Reiki Master Teacher and a former coeditor of the 
UK’s leading spiritual magazine, Kindred Spirit. She lives in London and 
Leicestershire, England. You can visit her at www.lizdean.com. 




INDEX 


Ace of Cups, 120-121 
Ace of Pentacles, 148-149 
Ace of Swords, 176-177 
Ace of Wands, 204-205 

Chariot, The, 58-61 
Cups 

Ace of Cups, 120-121 
Two of Cups, 122-123 
Three of Cups, 124-125 
Four of Cups, 126-127 
Five of Cups, 128-129 
Six of Cups, 130-131 
Seven of Cups, 132-133 
Eight of Cups, 134-135 
Nine of Cups, 136-137 
Ten of Cups, 138-139 
Page of Cups, 140-141 
Knight of Cups, 142-143 
Queen of Cups, 144-145 
King of Cups, 146-147 

Death, 82-85 
decks 

attuning, 14 
cleansing, 15 
cutting, 16 
early cards, 10 
protecting, 15 
Rider-Waite, 9, 10 
shuffling, 16 
variety of, 10 


Devil, The, 90-93 

Eight of Cups, 134-135 
Eight of Pentacles, 162-163 
Eight of Swords, 190-191 
Eight of Wands, 218-219 
Emperor, The, 46-49 
Empress, The, 42-45 

Five of Cups, 128-129 
Five of Pentacles, 156-157 
Five of Swords, 184-185 
Five of Wands, 212-213 
Fool, The, 30-33 
Four of Cups, 126-127 
Four of Pentacles, 154-155 
Four of Swords, 182-183 
Four of Wands, 210-211 

Hanged Man, The, 78-81 
Hermit, The, 66-69 
Hierophant, The, 50-53 
High Priestess, The, 38-41 

Judgment, 110-113 
Justice, 74-77 

Kabbala 

Chariot, The, 59 
Death, 83 
Devil, The, 91 
Emperor, The, 47 
Empress, The, 43 
Fool, The, 31 
Hanged Man, The, 79 
Hermit, The, 67 
Hierophant, The, 51 


High Priestess, The, 39 
Judgment, 111 
Justice, 75 
Lovers, The, 55 
Magician, The, 35 
Moon, The, 103 
Star, The, 99 
Strength, 63 
Sun, The, 107 
Temperance, 87 
Tower, The, 95 
Tree of Life layout, 26-27 
Wheel of Fortune, The, 71 
World, The, 115 
King of Cups, 146-147 
King of Pentacles, 174-175 
King of Swords, 202-203 
King of Wands, 230-231 
Knight of Cups, 142-143 
Knight of Pentacles, 170-171 
Knight of Swords, 198-199 
Knight of Wands, 226-227 

layouts 

Celtic Cross, 24 
Chakra Spread, 28 
Chariot, The, 61 
Death, 85 
Devil, The, 93 
Emperor, The, 49 
Empress, The, 45 
Fool, The, 33 
Hanged Man, The, 81 
Hermit, The, 69 
Hierophant, The, 53 
High Priestess, 41 


Judgment, 113 

Justice, 77 

Lovers, The, 57 

Magician, The, 37 

Month Ahead, 26 

Moon, The, 105 

one-card daily reading, 20 

Past, Present, Future, 20-22 

Significator card, 21-22 

Star, The, 101 

Strength, 65 

Sun, The, 109 

Temperance, 89 

Tower, The, 97 

Tree of Life, 26-27 

Week Ahead, 25 

Wheel of Fortune, The, 73 

World, The, 117 

Year Ahead, 26 

Yes or No, 23 

Lovers, The, 54-57 

Magician, The, 34-37 

Major Arcana 

Chariot, The, 58-61 
Death, 82-85 
Devil, The, 90-93 
Emperor, The, 46-49 
Empress, The, 42-45 
Fool, The, 30-33 
Hanged Man, The, 78-81 
Hermit, The, 66-69 
Hierophant, The, 50-53 
High Priestess, The, 38-41 
introduction to, 11 
Judgment, 110-113 


Justice, 74-77 
Lovers, The, 54-57 
Magician, The, 34-37 
Moon, The, 102-105 
Star, The, 98-101 
Strength, 62-65 
Sun, The, 106-109 
Temperance, 86-89 
Tower, The, 94-97 
Wheel of Fortune, The, 70-73 
World, The, 114-117 
Minor Arcana 

Ace of Cups, 120-121 
Ace of Pentacles, 148-149 
Ace of Swords, 176-177 
Ace of Wands, 204-205 
Two of Cups, 122-123 
Two of Pentacles, 150-151 
Two of Swords, 178-179 
Two of Wands, 206-207 
Three of Cups, 124-125 
Three of Pentacles, 152-153 
Three of Swords, 180-181 
Three of Wands, 208-209 
Four of Cups, 126-127 
Four of Pentacles, 154-155 
Four of Swords, 182-183 
Four of Wands, 210-211 
Five of Cups, 128-129 
Five of Pentacles, 156-157 
Five of Swords, 184-185 
Five of Wands, 212-213 
Six of Cups, 130-131 
Six of Pentacles, 158-159 
Six of Swords, 186-187 
Six of Wands, 214-215 


Seven of Cups, 132-133 
Seven of Pentacles, 160-161 
Seven of Swords, 188-189 
Seven of Wands, 216-217 
Eight of Cups, 134-135 
Eight of Pentacles, 162-163 
Eight of Swords, 190-191 
Eight of Wands, 218-219 
Nine of Cups, 136-137 
Nine of Pentacles, 164-165 
Nine of Swords, 192-193 
Nine of Wands, 220-221 
Ten of Cups, 138-139 
Ten of Pentacles, 166-167 
Ten of Swords, 194-195 
Ten of Wands, 222-223 
Page of Cups, 140-141 
Page of Pentacles, 168-169 
Page of Swords, 196-197 
Page of Wands, 224-225 
Knight of Cups, 142-143 
Knight of Pentacles, 170-171 
Knight of Swords, 198-199 
Knight of Wands, 226-227 
Queen of Cups, 144-145 
Queen of Pentacles, 172-173 
Queen of Swords, 200-201 
Queen of Wands, 228-229 
King of Cups, 146-147 
King of Pentacles, 174-175 
King of Swords, 202-203 
King of Wands, 230-231 

Moon, The, 102-105 

Nine of Cups, 136-137 

Nine of Pentacles, 164-165 


Nine of Swords, 192-193 
Nine of Wands, 220-221 
numbers 

0 (The Fool), 30-33 

I (The Magician), 34-37 

II (The High Priestess), 38-41 

III (The Empress), 42-45 

IV (The Emperor), 46-49 

V (The Hierophant), 50-53 

VI (The Lovers), 54-57 

VII (The Chariot), 58-61 

VIII (Strength), 62-65 

IX (The Hermit), 66-69 

X (The Wheel of Fortune), 70-73 

XI (Justice), 74-77 

XII (The Hanged Man), 78-81 

XIII (Death), 82-85 

XIV (Temperance), 86-89 

XV (The Devil), 90-93 

XVI (The Tower), 94-97 

XVII (The Star), 98-101 

XVIII (The Moon), 102-105 

XIX (The Sun), 106-109 

XX (Judgment), 110-113 

XXI (The World), 114-117 

Page of Cups, 140-141 
Page of Pentacles, 168-169 
Page of Swords, 196-197 
Page of Wands, 224-225 
Pentacles 

Ace of Pentacles, 148-149 
Two of Pentacles, 150-151 
Three of Pentacles, 152-153 
Four of Pentacles, 154-155 
Five of Pentacles, 156-157 


Six of Pentacles, 158-159 
Seven of Pentacles, 160-161 
Eight of Pentacles, 162-163 
Nine of Pentacles, 164-165 
Ten of Pentacles, 166-167 
Page of Pentacles, 168-169 
Knight of Pentacles, 170-171 
Queen of Pentacles, 172-173 
King of Pentacles, 174-175 

Queen of Cups, 144-145 
Queen of Pentacles, 172-173 
Queen of Swords, 200-201 
Queen of Wands, 228-229 

readings 

card selection for, 16-17 
colors and, 19 
flipping cards for, 17 
internal guidance, 17 
intuitions hooks, 18 
numbers and, 18-19 
one-card daily reading, 20 
reversals, 18, 19 
ruling elements and, 18 
Significator card, 21-22 
spaces for, 15 
state of mind and, 17 
reflections 

Chariot, The, 61 
Death, 85 
Devil, The, 93 
Emperor, The, 49 
Empress, The, 45 
Fool, The, 33 
Hanged Man, The, 81 


Hermit, The, 69 
Hierophant, The, 53 
High Priestess, The, 41 
Judgment, 113 
Justice, 77 
Lovers, The, 57 
Magician, The, 37 
Moon, The, 105 
Star, The, 101 
Strength, 65 
Sun, The, 109 
Tower, The, 97 
Wheel of Fortune, The, 73 
World, The, 117 

Seven of Cups, 132-133 
Seven of Pentacles, 160-161 
Seven of Swords, 188-189 
Seven of Wands, 216-217 
Six of Cups, 130-131 
Six of Pentacles, 158-159 
Six of Swords, 186-187 
Six of Wands, 214-215 
Star, The, 98-101 
Strength, 62-65 
Sun, The, 106-109 
Swords 

Ace of Swords, 176-177 
Two of Swords, 178-179 
Three of Swords, 180-181 
Four of Swords, 182-183 
Five of Swords, 184-185 
Six of Swords, 186-187 
Seven of Swords, 188-189 
Eight of Swords, 190-191 
Nine of Swords, 192-193 


Ten of Swords, 194-195 
Page of Swords, 196-197 
Knight of Swords, 198-199 
Queen of Swords, 200-201 
King of Swords, 202-203 
symbols 

Chariot, The, 59-60 

Death, 84 

Devil, The, 92 

Emperor, The, 48 

Empress, The, 43-44 

Fool, The, 32 

Hanged Man, The, 80 

Hermit, The, 67-68 

Hierophant, The, 52 

High Priestess, The, 39-40 

Judgment, 112 

Justice, 76 

Lovers, The, 56 

Magician, The, 35-36 

Moon, The, 103-104 

Star, The, 99-100 

Strength, 63-64 

Sun, The, 107-108 

Temperance, 88 

Tower, The, 96 

Wheel of Fortune, The, 71-72 

World, The, 116 

Temperance, 86-89 
Ten of Cups, 138-139 
Ten of Pentacles, 166-167 
Ten of Swords, 194-195 
Ten of Wands, 222-223 
Three of Cups, 124-125 
Three of Pentacles, 152-153 


Three of Swords, 180-181 
Three of Wands, 208-209 
Tower, The, 94-97 
Two of Cups, 122-123 
Two of Pentacles, 150-151 
Two of Swords, 178-179 
Two of Wands, 206-207 

Wands 

Ace of Wands, 204-205 
Two of Wands, 206-207 
Three of Wands, 208-209 
Four of Wands, 210-211 
Five of Wands, 212-213 
Six of Wands, 214-215 
Seven of Wands, 216-217 
Eight of Wands, 218-219 
Nine of Wands, 220-221 
Ten of Wands, 222-223 
Page of Wands, 224-225 
Knight of Wands, 226-227 
Queen of Wands, 228-229 
King of Wands, 230-231 
Wheel of Fortune, The, 70-73 
World, The, 114-117 


This book is dedicated to all students of tarot. May your unique journey through 

the cards bring you great rewards. 



© 2015 Fair Winds Press 


First published in the USA in 2015 by 
Fair Winds Press, a member of 
Quarto Publishing Group USA Inc. 

100 Cummings Center 
Suite 406-L 

Beverly, MA 01915-6101 
www.f airwindspress. com 

Visit www.bodymindbeautyhealth.com. It’s your personal guide to a happy, healthy, and extraordinary life! 

A11 rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced or utilized, in any form or by any means, 
electronic or mechanical, without prior permission in writing from the publisher. 

Illustrations from the Rider-Waite Tarot Deck® reproduced by permission of U.S. Games Systems, Inc., 
Stamford, CT 06902 USA. Copyright © 1971 by U.S. Games Systems, Inc. Further reproduction 
prohibited. The Rider-Waite Tarot Deck® is a registered trademark of U.S. Games Systems, Inc. 

Digital edition published in 2015 

Digital edition: 978-1-62788-640-6 
Softcover edition: 978-1-59233-657-9 

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data available 
Cover and Book design by Sporto 


